DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

TOURISM
– THE HIDDEN GIANT –
AND
FOOT AND MOUTH
Government Response
to the Fourth Report from the
Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee,
Commons Session 2000–2001

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
By Command of Her Majesty
October 2001

Cm 5279

£4.50

Published by The Stationery Office Limited
and available from:
The Stationery Office
(Mail, telephone and fax orders only)
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders 0870 600 5533
Email book.orders@theso.co.uk
Internet http://www.clicktso.com
The Stationery Office Bookshops
123 Kingsway, London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
33 Wine Street, Bristol BS1 2BQ
0117 9264306 Fax 0117 9294515
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
The Stationery Office Oriel Bookshop
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF1 2BZ
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
Accredited Agents
(See Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers

DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

TOURISM
– THE HIDDEN GIANT –
AND
FOOT AND MOUTH
Government Response
to the Fourth Report from the
Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee,
Commons Session 2000–2001

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
By Command of Her Majesty
October 2001

Cm 5279

£4.50

© Crown Copyright 2001
The text in this document may be reproduced free of charge in any format or media
without requiring specific permission. This is subject to the material not being used in a
derogatory manner or in a misleading context. The source of the material must be
acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document must be included when
being reproduced as part of another publication or service.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
HMSO, The Copyright Unit, St. Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603-723000 or e-mail: copyright@hmso.gov.uk

TOURISM – THE HIDDEN GIANT – AND FOOT AND
MOUTH

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE FOURTH
REPORT FROM THE CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
SELECT COMMITTEE, COMMONS SESSION 20002001

This Response was prepared and sent to the House of Commons Culture,
Media and Sport Select Committee at the beginning of August 2001.
(i)

In 1999, the Tourism Society expressed concern to this
Committee that the English Tourism Council had been
designed more by reference to the needs of the Government
than with a focus on the customer. We remarked then that “it
remains to be seen whether the strategic gains within
Government [from the creation of the English Tourism
Council] will off-set the loss of a clearly identified national
marketing arm for English tourism”.

Although the Committee has not made a specific recommendation in this area
we have considered what was said carefully. Much of the tourism industry is
made up of small businesses, is fragmented, and we agree could benefit from
leadership and guidance. That is why the English Tourism Council (ETC) was
created and why, in Tomorrow's Tourism, the Government identified five key
areas on which it should focus to raise the profile of the industry and provide
strong leadership. Those areas are: research, ensuring quality, promoting best
practice and innovation, overseeing systems for data collection and analysis
and acting as a voice for successful sustainable tourism in England. This role
does not just support the needs of Government. It is vital for the whole
industry and for all those many parts of the economy and society for which a
successful tourism industry is significant. The ETC was not intended to
deliver tourism services such as marketing, which is the responsibility of the
Regional Tourist Boards (RTBs) who, along with local authorities, are
considered best placed to deal with the consumer-facing aspects of tourism.
In 1999, in its Sixth Report (Session 1998-99) The Department for Culture,
Media and Sport and its Quangos, the Committee said of the ETC that “the
creation of the new body should enable greater clarity about the division of
labour between the Council and the Department. The Council should have a
greater range of skills at its disposal, including expertise on transport and
sustainability, enabling it to contribute more effectively to the wider
Government agenda.” In its response to that report, the Department for
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) endorsed this opinion, and emphasised the
strategic benefits that the ETC could bring to the tourism industry by helping
to channel its resources in the most useful way and offering support and
3

advice where needed. However, DCMS recognises that Foot and Mouth
Disease (FMD) tested very hard the existing support structure for tourism.
DCMS is reviewing how the existing arrangements performed, and what
more may need to be done for the future.
(ii)

The expenditure funded by the Government for the respective
tourist boards in 1999-2000 was as follows: £19.4 million for
the Scottish Tourist Board; £15.4 million for the Wales Tourist
Board; and £11.7 million for the English Tourism Council.
Furthermore, the allocation to the English Tourism Council
includes all allocations to the Regional Tourist Boards from
public funds. The levels of spending by tourists (excluding day
trips) for the respective nations is as follows: £2.5 billion in
Scotland; £1.4 billion in Wales; and £24 billion in England.
The grant-in-aid for the Scottish Tourist Board was the
equivalent of £3.77 per head; the grant-in-aid for the Wales
Tourist Board was the equivalent of £4.03 per head. The
equivalent figure for English domestic tourism was 20 pence
per head of population. These figures and the planned freeze
of expenditure on the British Tourist Authority leave no doubt
that there has been a sustained problem of under-investment
by the public sector in tourism that has affected English
tourism in particular.

The Government is not convinced that the evidence points to a sustained
problem of under-investment in tourism in recent years. A high proportion of
visitors to rural areas in particular travel from within the UK. The promotion
of English tourist destinations to the domestic market is an issue which has
been raised frequently with the new Minister for Tourism, Film and
Broadcasting at meetings held in areas most affected by the FMD outbreak.
The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport has already invited the
industry through the Confederation of British Industry and the ETC to come
forward by early September with a programme of action for innovation and
reform which will include coordination of marketing, as well as action on
training and skills and quality improvement. The Government's expenditure
plans provide for the ETC steadily to increase the amount of funding
allocated to regional tourism, primarily the RTBs. It will itself benefit from
a higher level of overall Government funding - that for domestic tourism is
rising from £10 million this year (including £0.4 million for London which
goes direct to the Greater London Authority (GLA)) to £12.5 million a year
by 2003-04 (London element yet to be decided). Out of that, £5.5 million will
be provided for tourism in the regions (including London) in 2001-02, rising
to £6.2 million and £6.5 million in subsequent years. This regional funding,
in any case, only constitutes between 10 and 25 per cent of the RTBs’
income, the rest coming from membership subscriptions and commercial
activities.
Expenditure in support of tourism is not limited to funding for the tourist
boards. In England, over £90 million is spent each year by local authorities
4

in promoting tourism. Much of the £1 billion that DCMS spent in 2000-01 on
arts, museums, galleries, heritage and sport also directly and indirectly
benefited the tourism industry. This is in addition to substantial private sector
expenditure on the marketing of tourism businesses and attractions.
In 1998, the then Secretary of State announced above inflation increases in
funding for the British Tourist Authority (BTA) in 1999-2000. He increased
the BTA's grant by £5 million over the three years from 1999-2000 to 200102. Following the Chancellor's SR2000 spending review, the Secretary of
State announced in July 2000 his intention to continue BTA funding for the
period from 2001-02 to 2003-04 at the present, higher, level, agreed in 1998
(net of £1.5 m for London tourism, to be channelled via the GLA from April
2001). The current level of grant is therefore a recognition of the importance
and effectiveness of BTA's work. The BTA also receives a significant amount
of funding annually from commercial partners – some £15 million.
A key aim of Government support for tourism promotion is to encourage an
increase in the earnings derived from overseas visitors’ expenditure. The
Government recognises that grant-in-aid to the Scottish Tourist Board and the
Wales Tourist Board per head of population has been much higher than that
to the ETC over the last decade. However, comparisons of grant-per-head of
population may be misleading. They say nothing about the extent to which
financial support is needed to address market failure in different parts of the
country or about comparative success in attracting tourism earnings. The
devolved administrations make their own decisions on funding that take into
account local conditions and needs. In England, the arguments for increasing
public spending on an industry that has done well anyway have not been so
strong. Incoming visitor expenditure per head of population in England is
higher, at £222 per head, than that in Scotland (£160 per head) or Wales (£92
per head). Total spending by tourists has grown faster in England in recent
years (Table1). In the Government’s view the record of success of tourism in
England stands up to any comparison with that of Scotland or Wales. It could
as well be argued, in contrast to the Committee’s view that if tourists already
spend ten times as much in England as in Scotland and that spending has
grown faster in England than in Scotland, then it is difficult to see why the
lower levels of spending per head were disadvantageous.
Table 1: Spending by UK resident tourists (£)
1991

1999

%
increase

England

204

260

27%

Scotland

289

325

13%

Wales

386

386

0%

5

Table 2: Spending by overseas tourists (£)
1991

1999

%
increase

England

161

222

38%

Scotland

115

160

39%

54

92

70%*

Wales

Table 3: Spending by all tourists (£)
1991

1999

%
increase

England

364

481

32%

Scotland

404

485

20%

Wales

440

478

9%

*Before 1999 the International Passenger Survey did not interview on routes from the Irish
Republic; this information was obtained from other sources which could not identify the UK
region where the visitor was going. Therefore the 1991 figures do not include visitors from
Ireland. This has little effect on the England and Scotland figures but does affect those for
Wales.

(iii) The low level of information technology provision in the
tourism industry has been a hindrance to information
collection and analysis. The English Tourism Council
confirmed that, prior to the current foot and mouth outbreak,
only six out of the ten Regional Tourist Boards provided web
sites, and the Council recognised the importance of
encouraging and supporting information technology
development in tourism, referring to the “critical importance of
new media to the success of the industry”.
The Government recognises the importance that new technology plays in
supporting tourism. That is why an E-Tourism Advisory Group was set up in
August 2000 under the Chairmanship of the then Minister for Tourism, Film
and Broadcasting to look at how new technology could be exploited to create
a world class E-Tourism service. The Group, which comprises experts from
the tourism and technology industries, has considered the main options for
public/private partnership. An EnglandNet project has been agreed whereby
central and regional resources and expertise will provide effective
information and communications technology services to the benefit of
consumers, industry service providers and destinations at a local, regional and
national scale. Commercial partners will also be sought.

6

The ETC are taking forward the first part of the EnglandNet project, using
£0.9 million funds which they were awarded under the Capital Modernisation
Fund. ETC is working in collaboration with the RTBs to deliver a set of
value-added online business and marketing services to the tourism industry,
harnessing electronic business technologies.
(iv)

We recommend that the Department for Education and
Employment recommend urgently that all local education
authorities review the advice and instructions they give to
schools and ensure that, whenever possible, visits go ahead.

Throughout the FMD outbreak, officials of the Department for Education and
Employment (DfEE) (and now the Department for Education and Skills DfES) have maintained close contact with all local education authorities in
England and have used every opportunity to encourage them to take action
which is appropriate to the situation. As a result, earlier blanket bans on visits
have now been lifted, outdoor activity centres have reopened wherever
possible, and schools are again undertaking a range of educational visits and
activities.
The evidence to which the Select Committee refers at Appendix 16
(Clearwell Caves) was particularly concerned about advice to schools in
Gloucestershire. That early advice could be interpreted as discouraging
school visits. However, Gloucestershire issued revised advice on 4 April in
line with DfEE's advice that the countryside is open.
(v)

At the present juncture, it is not possible to examine whether
and why the Government and other public authorities were
slow to respond adequately to the implications for tourism of
the outbreak of foot and mouth disease. It will be essential
subsequently to examine this issue in detail, not least to ensure
that appropriate lessons are learned for the future organisation
of public sector support for tourism and Government
sponsorship of the industry.

The Government responded promptly and directly to the FMD outbreak. On
23 February, DCMS alerted rural tourism trade associations to the guidance
that the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) had issued to the
public the previous day. By 5 March there was guidance on the DCMS website on visiting the countryside for tourism, sport or recreation. On 6 March,
the then Secretary of State and Tourism Minister reviewed the impact of FMD
with MAFF, Department of the Environment, Transport and Regions (DETR)
and Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) Ministers (as well as ETC, BTA
and the British Hospitality Association) at the Tourism Summit. On 12
March, DCMS held its first Foot and Mouth Tourism Summit and reviewed
the first proposals commissioned earlier from ETC and BTA industry
representatives. These proposals were fed into the Rural Task Force which
met for the first time on 14 March. Guidance was available to visitor
attractions from 28 March to help them to reopen.
7

As the Committee recommends, the Government will carefully consider what
lessons there are to be learned, including whether better up-to-the minute
visitor information can be provided on rights of way closures.
(vi)

As matters stand, it appears that no additional public funding
will be available in the immediate future for the English
Tourism Council or for Regional Tourist Boards. We find this
astonishing. That approach calls into question whether the
Government has fully grasped the extent to which publiclyfunded marketing and promotion represent one of the few
specific aids for tourism businesses in affected areas that are
struggling to survive the current crisis. We return to the longer
term case for marketing England as a tourist destination later
in this Report.

(xiii) We recommend that the Government re-examine
fundamentally and as a matter of urgency the case for
sustained public funding for local, regional and national
marketing of England and its component parts as a tourist
destination. In future, it will be essential to promote areas most
adversely affected by the current crisis with public funding, to
develop a more coherent approach to marketing through the
Regional Tourist Boards and to provide funding for the
packaging and marketing of England as a tourist destination in
its own right.
Since the Committee prepared its report, additional funding has been made
available to Regional Tourist Boards. They have access to the £50 million
Rural Business Recovery Fund which the Department for Environment, Food
& Rural Affairs (DEFRA) has set up to run through the Regional
Development Associations (RDAs), and money will be directed particularly
to those areas which have been worst affected. The RDAs have formulated
their recovery plans, which are being agreed with Government, and RTBs
have been involved in advising on the content of these plans. As part of the
latest batch of money to be put into the Fund, for instance, one RDA alone is
proposing to invest £2 million in tourism promotion and development.
The Government takes the view that domestic marketing is best carried out
by the RTBs, local authorities and other destination management
organisations, as well as by the industry itself. Some have argued for a coordinating role for the ETC, establishing ‘themes’ across England for
example, such as gardens, sport, or castles. Indeed, although the ETC has no
marketing role as a strategic body, it has already produced a branding guide
for England that can be used by all appropriate tourism organisations and
businesses. We are not convinced that public expenditure on promoting
England as a whole as a destination for English holiday-makers is likely to
have a significant impact on consumer choice, given the number of different
and distinct choices already marketed at the regional level. At the industry
Tourism Forum on 21 November 2000, however, the then Secretary of State
8

indicated that the Government was prepared to look at the possibility of
marketing England if the industry were to put forward a coherent case. No
case has since been presented by the industry in any detail, although ETC has
made a case for additional funding and how that would be deployed.
(vii) We recommend that the Government as a matter of urgency
appoint a coordinator of all Government activities for the areas
most deeply affected by the outbreak of foot and mouth disease
reporting to the Cabinet Office. We emphasise that this is for a
limited number of areas that require specific attention beyond
measures focussed on regions.
The Government accepts that coordination of help for the most severely
affected areas is important. At national level, coordination is provided by the
Cabinet Sub-Committee on Rural Renewal (DA (RR)) and the Rural Task
Force (see response to recommendation xii); on a day-to-day basis, DEFRA
coordinates the work of the various Departments involved. At regional and
local level, a variety of coordination mechanisms (to deal with aspects of the
outbreak other than disease control and its direct consequences such as carcass
disposal) have evolved to suit the needs of each region. These have all involved
the Government Office for the Region, the RDA, MAFF (now DEFRA), the
Small Business Service of DTI, the Employment Service, and other
Government agencies, together with the local authorities (county and district
councils), tourist boards, business representative organisations and others.
The Government announced on 3 August that Lord Haskins had been
appointed as Rural Recovery Co-ordinator to help local authorities and other
agencies plan for the recovery in Cumbria, the area worst affected by the
FMD outbreak. He will also consider what lessons would be applicable to the
other areas that have been particularly affected by the impact of FMD.
(viii) It will be important for the Government to clarify as soon as
possible the additional assistance that it will offer to local
authorities in the most affected areas that provide assistance to
businesses not conforming to the Government scheme.
The Government has issued guidance to local authorities on non-domestic
rating and hardship relief for businesses affected by foot and mouth disease.
Local authorities can give rate relief to any business suffering hardship. The
Government has encouraged local authorities to do so for businesses
seriously affected by the FMD outbreak.
Government normally funds 75% of the cost of such relief with the local
authority funding the remainder. The Government announced that its funding
will be increased to 95% for hardship relief granted because of FMD for
properties with a rateable value of £12,000 or less, in 151 rural local
authorities in England. Since the Committee prepared its Report, this funding
has been extended to properties with a rateable value of up to £50,000 in the
37 most seriously affected authorities. The Government will also increase its
funding to 98% for hardship relief granted costing, net, more than 0.4% of a

9

Council’s annual net budget in any of the 151 authorities and the hardship
relief scheme, as a whole, will now continue until the end of the year. The
Government is keeping the scheme under review as evidence of the wider
economic impact of FMD emerges.
(ix)

We recommend that the Government examine the case for a job
retention subsidy for the tourism industry in the most adversely
affected areas to ensure that vital skills are not lost to those
areas and possibly to the country for good.

The Government has considered this idea carefully but has not been
convinced by the arguments for a wage subsidy scheme. It would be less
flexible than alternative grant or soft loan schemes and more difficult to
administer, as it requires evidence not only of lost revenue but also of the
intention to make specific employees redundant. It would be difficult to target
successfully and would therefore have high deadweight, helping failing
businesses that would have been reducing staff anyway and having the
potential to encourage employers to maximise redundancy announcements,
rather than to seek alternative ways of employing staff. It might also create a
precedent for other sectors in temporary structural difficulty to argue for a
more general scheme such as those we no longer pursue for strong economic
reasons. Providing funds for the RDAs and allowing them to decide on the
basis of local needs what is the most appropriate help to give businesses is a
far more focussed and flexible option than a national job retention subsidy.
(x)

We recommend the immediate creation of a National Tourism
Corporation for England, operating on the model of Urban
Development Corporations established in the 1980s. This
Corporation would be able to develop and implement a tourist
strategy. It would have direct powers to distribute funds to areas
in most need, in consultation with but not through the English
Tourism Council, Regional Tourist Boards and Regional
Development Agencies .

The Government cannot respond in full without some further understanding
of exactly what would be entailed by this proposal. However, it is clear that
substantial additional funding would be required. Moreover, care would have
to be taken that such an organisation, if it did exist, did not cut across the
work of the RTBs and the RDAs or overlap with DCMS and ETC's
responsibilities for developing tourism strategy and policy. The Urban
Development Corporations, rather than co-ordinating activity nationwide,
were 12 separate statutory bodies, operating in tightly defined geographical
borders in inner city areas. They were all self-standing Non-Departmental
Public Bodies (NDPBs) without any umbrella organisation, and were given
specific powers to override certain of the functions of local government. It is
unclear how a single National Tourism Corporation could fulfil a similar
function. However, the Government is willing to look at ways to bring
business people with a knowledge of tourism closer into the arrangements for
Government support for the industry.

10

(xi)

It is essential that the Lottery distributing bodies respond
sensitively and as generously as possible to the additional needs
of projects in afffected areas arising from the current crisis in
rural tourism.

Lottery distributors operate at arms length from the Government and as such
DCMS cannot insist that they fund particular schemes. Aside from the New
Opportunities Fund (NOF), which follows Government policy directives, it is
up to the lottery distributors themselves to decide whether to target particular
areas that have been badly affected by foot and mouth. Several have indeed
responded positively, for example: the Heritage Lottery Fund have relaxed the
access requirements that wildlife trusts must fulfil to be awarded grants; the
Community Fund (until April 2001 the National Lottery Charities Board),
which have given £274 million to projects dealing with rural disadvantage
and isolation since 1995, has invited charitable organisations to discuss
projects that could help rural communities hit by FMD.
NOF anticipates that local communities suffering from the effects of the
disease may want to work in partnership with the statutory and voluntary
sector to bid for funding from its open grant schemes, particularly the
environment initiative ‘Green Spaces and Sustainable Communities’.
(xii) We recommend that a Minister in the Cabinet Office be
charged with responsibility for coordination of all Government
involvement with assistance for rural communities and
businesses affected by the outbreak of foot and mouth disease
beyond the immediate impact on farming.
The Government agrees that proper co-ordination of help to rural businesses
is important. On this specific issue, early in the outbreak the Prime Minister
asked the Minister for the Environment to head a Rural Task Force. This is
now chaired by the Rural Affairs Minister. More generally, the Cabinet SubCommittee on Rural Renewal (DA(RR)) has a remit to oversee the
development and implementation of the Government’s policies on the rural
economy and rural communities. At present, the Rural Task Force is charged
with co-ordinating stakeholders views and advising Government on relief to
rural businesses. When, in the longer term, that group's work is finished, the
responsibility for co-ordinating Government work will pass to DA (RR),
which has succeeded the Ministerial Group on Rural Affairs (MISC8).
(xiv) Regardless of where departmental responsibility is located in
the future we recommend that tourism is and is seen to be the
primary responsibility of the relevant Minister.
DCMS has had a Minister with specific named responsibility for tourism
since 1997. Dr Kim Howells is the Minister for Tourism, Film and
Broadcasting. The biannual Tourism Forum, chaired by the Secretary of State
with more than 80 representatives from businesses, trade associations,
national and local Government invited, exists to encourage the development
of common action in tourism. The industry also has a direct line into

11

Government through the annual Tourism Summits, with Ministers from all
relevant Departments and key players in the industry attending. The
Government believes that tourism has been given strong support over the past
four years by DCMS, a Department that allows the synergy between the
tourism industry and the cultural, sporting and leisure sectors to be fully
exploited.

August 2001

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
On behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Dd 5070198 10/01 19585 664477

12

