DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

OLYMPICS
Government Response to
‘A London Olympic Bid for 2012’ (HC 268)
Report of the
Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee
Session 2002–2003

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
June 2003

Cm 5867

© Crown Copyright 2003
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE CULTURE, MEDIA AND
SPORT COMMITTEE REPORT ‘A LONDON OLYMPIC BID FOR
2012’ (HC268)
The Government welcomes the close interest shown by the Culture, Media and Sport Committee
in a possible London Olympic bid, and has taken the Committee’s comments and
recommendations into account in deciding whether or not to support such a bid.
As the Committee will know, on 15 May the Government announced to Parliament its intention
to support a bid by the British Olympic Association to stage the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic
Games in London. In reaching its decision the Government has looked carefully at the impact of a
bid using the key criteria of affordability, deliverability, legacy and win-ability. The Government
believes that all these criteria can now be satisfied.
As the Committee has emphasised, a robust and sustainable funding package is fundamental to
the development of a high quality London bid. Working in close partnership with the other key
stakeholders, and in particular the Mayor of London, the London Development Agency and the
British Olympic Association, the Government has developed a funding package to underpin its
position as the ultimate guarantor for the Games in the event that the bid is successful. Fuller
details of this package are set out at (ii) below and at Appendix A.
The Select Committee’s report contained a number of key conclusions and recommendations.
(i)

The process followed by Government has produced in public no more than an anaemic 12
page summary of a 250 page document containing only impenetrable, estimated, aggregate
costs. We were grateful to receive confidential copies of the full report containing financial
estimates for a “specimen” Games. However, this was of limited use for the purposes of
accountability and none whatsoever with regard to public debate.

As the Committee acknowledged, the Government has provided copies of the report on a
restricted and confidential basis. As the Committee is aware, the Government’s view is that the
full report includes commercially confidential information, and other material that might be of
assistance to other applicant cities. The Government would also wish to emphasise that Arup’s
remit was to produce a specimen proposal for the Games, and that the detailed arrangements for
staging them will now need to be developed by the organisation to be set up by the three main
stakeholders, Government, the Mayor of London and the BOA, to manage the bid. The
Government has encouraged a full debate of the issues in public and Parliament and made
available the key facts and analysis to ensure that the debate is well informed. Opposition
spokespersons were also offered a detailed briefing on the work being undertaken in relation to a
possible bid. The bidding process itself will be governed by the rules and requirements of the IOC,
and involves a high degree of transparency in relation to the component elements of the bid.
(ii)

There are three key questions that the Government needs to answer before being able to
commit itself to a bid (and any such commitment will be all the better, easier and the more
convincing to the IOC for this work having been done):
—

that the costs and risks are understood as far as possible at this distance from the event,
can be afforded and are justified in comparison with other sporting and wider spending
demands on Government;
1

—

that the challenges and implications of delivering the necessary facilities and
infrastructure are understood and catered for;

—

that any infrastructure legacies created will be free from on-going, possibly open-ended,
subsidy necessary from the public sector.

The Government has undertaken detailed analysis of all the costs and risks and has worked
closely with key stakeholders to ensure that the potential impact of a bid is fully understood. So far
as revenues are concerned, the assumption, based on the Arup report, is that in excess of £2 billion
will be available from a combination of the sale of rights, tickets sales, sponsorship and other
commercial support for the Games. The public funding element of the package contains
significant provision for risk and contingencies (more than twice the level of public subsidy
suggested in the Arup report) in case overruns, unforeseen costs or revenue shortfalls arise as the
project nears completion in 2010-12. The level of public subsidy provided for within the package is
as follows:
●
●
●
●

National Lottery
Council Tax
LDA
Total

£1.5 billion
£0.625 billion
£0.250 billion
£2.375 billion

The Government wishes to emphasise that this is not the budget for the Games. The anticipated
allocation of public funds to the budget will be significantly lower than this, but before reaching a
decision to support a London bid the Government was determined that there should be sufficient
funding in place to cater for all reasonably foreseeable eventualities in staging them. The
probability based risk assessment we have undertaken on Games’ costs and revenues provides
further reassurance that £2.375 billion represents an acceptable level of provision for potential
contingencies. Any residual risk that this level would be exceeded can be reduced through strong
management intervention during both the bidding and staging periods. In the unlikely event that
further public subsidy is required, the Government expects its responsibility as the ultimate
guarantor of Olympic funding to be discharged in a sharing arrangement with the Mayor of
London and through seeking additional National Lottery funding. These expectations will be
reviewed in 2005 once work on planning and costs has been completed and the outcome of the bid
is known. A copy of the Memorandum of Understanding that has been agreed between the
Government and the Mayor of London can be found at Appendix A.
Lessons learnt from previous major projects such as the Jubilee Line Extension, the Millennium
Dome, the National Stadium project and, most recently, the Manchester Commonwealth Games
have been incorporated into the analysis to ensure that the challenges and risks that would be
associated with staging a London Olympics are properly identified. The Government and its
partners will put in place robust planning and delivery mechanisms, operating at arms length but
fully accountable for the use of public funds, to ensure the efficient and effective delivery of a
London bid. During the bidding period we will be carrying out further detailed work to ensure
that the organisational structures for the actual staging of the Games would be similarly robust.
The Government will wish to see the legacy benefits of any Olympic investments maximised.
(iii) We are confident that the Government has undertaken more and better appraisal than
previous bidders in order to tackle the vagaries of estimating the costs for a huge and
complicated project nine and a half years away from the final delivery date. We trust that the
IOC will take note of the implications of all this effort in any future judgments it may make on
a London bid. Crucially, we expect the Government to finalise, and reconcile, the various
strands of its appraisal work and to be able to set out clearly and in detail what its conclusions
are, their bases, and how they influenced its decision on whether to bid or not.
2

The Government welcomes the Committee’s endorsement of the rigorous approach it has taken
to the analysis and appraisal of the implications of bidding for the Olympics. That approach has
also drawn favourable comment from Jacques Rogge, the President of the IOC. In its
memorandum of evidence to the Committee, the Government drew attention to a number of
ongoing strands of work relevant to a decision on whether or not to support an Olympic bid, and
the Committee may find it helpful to have the following update on those:
Affordability
We have considered the possible diversion of funds from other schemes and projects to support
the Olympics.
●

National Lottery: the Lottery will contribute up to £1.5 billion, primarily from new Olympic
Lottery Games (the introduction of which will require primary legislation) and the existing
sports Lottery stream (to meet the costs of elite sport and associated sports investments). It
is estimated that around £750m will be generated by the new Lottery games, around 50% of
which might represent money diverted from existing good causes. This diversion would
represent some £55m per year - about 4% of annual income to good causes from the
Lottery. These calculations are based on prudent assumptions about the likely impact of
Olympic Lottery games, provided by Camelot, and have been reviewed by the National
Lottery Commission. Up to £340 million would be sought from the established Lottery
sports distributors. The remaining contribution, were it needed, could be derived by
changing the shares of Lottery income passing to existing distributors beyond 2009 when
the current agreement on percentages to good causes is due to come to an end. This would
represent a further reduction of up to 7% for the other good causes. This far ahead it is
difficult to assess what the effect might be on individual programmes, but the objective will
be to ensure than any adverse impact is minimised and that the anticipated benefits arising
from the staging of the Olympics are shared as widely as possible. The Olympics will be a
national, and not just a London event, and the potential opportunities arising from it will
flow to all levels and well beyond the sports sector. For example, provision has been
included for a nationwide cultural programme, funded via the Olympics project, and
spanning the four year period up to and including 2012.

●

Council tax: the Olympics Precept would not require expenditure to be diverted from
existing or planned programmes.

●

LDA contribution: any necessary LDA contribution towards the Olympics would form part
of its wider investment programme for the regeneration of the Thames Gateway. Until the
outcome of the bid is known the LDA will only acquire land which could be used for
regeneration purposes should the bid not be successful.

Deliverability
The Government has made it clear that it would not support a bid for the Games if it were not
confident that we could stage them to good effect. As emphasised in its response to (ii) above, the
Government is determined that the lessons from earlier major projects should be both learned
and applied in putting together the arrangements for managing an Olympics bid. In partnership
with the Mayor of London and the BOA, we will establish a company to manage the bidding
process which will operate at arm’s length from Government. The Chair of this company will have
significant authority and responsibility for delivering a high quality and competitive bid. The key
bidding documents, including the Applicant Questionnaire and the Candidature File will,
however, require sign-off by the three key stakeholders. The bidding company’s costs are being
underwritten jointly by the Government and the LDA, although we anticipate that there will be a
significant contribution from the London business community.
The further work undertaken on transport arrangements is discussed under (viii) below.
3

Legacy
As discussed in (v) below, the bidding organisation will be expected to take account of legacy
considerations in developing its proposals for the bid. The potential for an anchor tenant for the
main stadium, for example a football club, will form part of this work.

The Government believes that bidding for and hosting the Games will deliver many benefits for
sport. An Olympics bid would support the vision for sport for the next decade as expressed in
Game Plan, the joint Strategy Unit and DCMS report for sport development. Hosting the Games
would provide the UK’s elite athletes with an unparalleled opportunity to showcase their talents
on home territory to a global audience. Government investment in talent development and elite
sport will continue to provide our athletes with the best possible chance to excel at a London
Olympics and win medals. Elite athletes are a continued source of encouragement to young and
old alike. We want to harness the inspiration of their example, and the prospect of hosting the
Games to drive up participation in sport. We know that sporting success motivates people to try
playing sport, but all too often lack of access, opportunities to play and coaches means that
enthusiasm is short lived. We are building a national framework for sport which will provide those
opportunities, and that determination is demonstrated by our investment of £1.2 billion in school
and grassroots sport. The Government is currently funding initiatives to continue to 2006 to
improve sport in schools, assist amateur sports clubs, and improve coaching and talent
development. Hosting the Games will also leave a legacy of new and improved sports facilities
around the country, some world class, which, with careful management, will be of lasting value to
sport and the wider community.

The LDA is in the process of commissioning Masterplanners to ensure that the plans for staging
the Olympics are properly integrated with the wider regeneration proposals for the relevant part
of the Thames Gateway area.

The Arup report identified a number of potential impacts flowing from a London 2012 Olympics.
These included direct economic impacts through increased tourism, job creation, the
regeneration of the Lower Lea Valley and inward investment and wider social benefits relating to
health, sporting participation and culture. Our work supports Arup’s broad conclusions although
the anticipated range of benefits is difficult to quantify, particularly at this early stage. Going
forward the challenge will be to design the bid and staging of a London 2012 Olympics in a way
that maximises these wider benefits for the country; this will be a key consideration informing the
bid.

Winnability
The Government’s broad assessment remains as set out in its memorandum of evidence to the
Committee. In addition to London, the following cities have to date confirmed their intention to
bid for the 2012 Games: Havana, Istanbul, Leipzig, Madrid, Moscow, New York and Paris. All are
expected to prepare strong bids, and our view remains that there is no clear favourite at this stage.
The arrangements we are putting in place to manage and present the bid to the IOC are geared
towards enhancing its chances of success.

(iv)

4

London might well end up with a stadium at Wembley, specifically built with the capability to
host the Olympics without legacy issues, and another in East London, actually built to host the
Games, with an uncertain future. If this duplication were in fact to occur much of the
responsibility would lie with the sporting bodies and agencies whose discussions with each
other, and with Government, have led to this confusion.

(v)

The most serious and creative thought needs to be given to the long-term future of an East
London stadium before a single word of the design brief is written. All options should be
considered from temporary construction and subsequent demolition, to a full range of
alternative uses after the Games. Such uses could include sporting, retail, leisure or residential
adaptation (or any combination thereof). We recognise, therefore, that there could be a
creative legacy option developed in due course. However, we recommend that, for the
purposes of the bottom line of the bid, the Olympic stadium be costed on the basis of
construction and demolition.

The construction of the new national stadium at Wembley is progressing well. As the Committee
has suggested, the new stadium will be capable, inter alia, of adaptation to stage major athletics
events. Those responsible for assembling the bid will be expected to determine the extent to which
Wembley National Stadium is used for staging Olympic events. So far as the main stadium for the
Games is concerned, they will need to consider a wide range of options, including the potential for
the use of temporary or convertible facilities. As indicated in response to (iii) above, securing a
long-term anchor tenant (sports or otherwise) will also be amongst the options to be considered,
but as the Committee suggests, the Government is not ruling out subsequent demolition of the
stadium as a means of avoiding the need for ongoing public subsidy.
(vi)

First, however, the Government must satisfy itself that the fundamental proposals for a
privately developed village and construction of any kind of stadium are in principle realisable
and deliverable between 2005 and 2012.

The bidding organisation will be expected to produce coherent, fully costed and practical plans for
these and the other facilities needed to support the bid.
(vii) We cannot insist strongly enough that, whatever new agencies are established, leading
unequivocally from the centre should be a Minister, located in the Cabinet Office or even No
10, and with an explicit cross- governmental remit and the power and personality to make
things happen. This should be established from day one, 31 January 2003, and should include
arrangements for liaison between that Minister and the Prime Minister as a matter of course.
The leadership issue cannot be allowed to languish for one minute if a positive decision has
been taken.
The Prime Minister has confirmed that the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport will
report directly to him on the Olympics bid. The Ad Hoc Cabinet Committee, chaired by the
Foreign Secretary, that was established to consider the 2012 bid will remain in place in order to
ensure that issues of cross-cutting relevance are identified and addressed as the bid is developed.
The Culture Secretary will be supported by a cross- departmental group of officials drawn from
those departments with a substantive interest in the bid.
(viii) The Government must provide clarity on transport issues if announcing a decision to go
forward with a bid.
—

what capital projects are required for, or before, 2012;

—

what investment will be required in measures to improve levels of service;

—

the costs involved and the risks of their escalation (always greater when the pace of
construction is being dictated by an external deadline);

—

the risks of non-delivery and related contingency plans and/or resources;

—

a strategy, in outline at least, for the “unprecedented” management of the London
transport network (including demand management) recommended to cope with
Olympic transport needs; and

—

any apportionment of these costs, or elements of them, to the Olympic balance sheet.
5

As the Committee has rightly pointed out, a robust transport solution is critical to the success of
the bid and the staging of the Games themselves. The Government is satisfied, on the basis of the
work undertaken by Arup and subsequent discussions with key transport providers, that such a
solution will be available. As the Government made clear in its evidence to the Committee, this
will require the managed use of the extensive transport infrastructure, both existing and planned,
in and around the proposed Olympics zone, together with some targeted improvements. These
would be likely to include improvements to both London Underground and National Rail stations
in the vicinity, and enhancements to services providing local access in order to cope with the
additional demand.
It will be for the bidding organisation, in consultation with Transport for London and other key
transport providers to develop a detailed and costed master plan for the Olympics. They will need
to look at the integration of the transport services for the Games, commission detailed feasibility
studies in respect of the service and infrastructure enhancements, and carry out detailed
modelling work. They will also need to consider together with Transport for London how to
maximise any wider transport legacy from the Games.
The funding package for the Games includes an element for anticipated transport costs. These
estimates were developed in discussion with Transport for London, the Strategic Rail Authority,
London Underground, the Highways Agency and the Metropolitan Police. As indicated above it
will be the responsibility of the bidding organisation to develop the transport plan, but the
Committee may wish to be aware that in developing the funding package the Government has
assumed the following requirements:
●

A dedicated road route from central London to the Olympic zone for the Olympic family,
protected persons and other designated Olympic traffic;

●

Transport for the Olympic family and volunteers;

●

Significant service enhancements across the public transport system for the duration of the
Games and the provision of designated Olympic transport services and park & ride
schemes;

●

An Olympic transport publicity programme; and

●

Some localised station improvements close to the Olympic zone to cope with peaks of
demand, with improved services providing local access.

London has a large and mature transport network which copes with several million passenger
movements a day. It is therefore well placed to cope with the pressures by comparison with cities
that have hosted Olympics in the past. A number of major improvements to transport in London
are already planned to be in place prior to 2012. These include:
●

Modernisation of the tube, including increased capacity on the Jubilee Line;

●

The completion of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link, including the international station at
Stratford;

●

The extension of the Dockland Light Railway to City Airport.

The Government has already made it clear that it is satisfied that a robust transport solution for a
London Olympics can be delivered without Crossrail.

6

OLYMPIC FUNDING: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND THE MAYOR OF LONDON
1. In anticipation of an announcement by the Government that it will support a bid by the
British Olympic Association to host the 2012 Olympics in London, the Government and the
Mayor of London have reached an outline understanding of how the costs of the Olympics should
be met. Putting this understanding into operation is subject to the normal decision making
processes of the bodies involved.
2. The objects of the funding which are covered by this understanding are those which were
included in the Arup report on the Olympics completed in 2001 and those additional areas which
DCMS has allowed for in its work on a likely public subsidy, as published by the Culture, Media
and Sport Select Committee (HC268 dated 23 January 2003). The Government and the Mayor of
London recognise that spending towards these objects may necessarily be in different amounts
than now assessed. These objects and this understanding do not cover other capital or current
expenditure which may be of benefit to the Olympics, for example major transport infrastructure
improvements, which the Government has not considered essential to the Olympics.
3. The Government and the Mayor of London intend that calls on public subsidy to meet
Olympic costs should be kept to the minimum, and together they intend to ensure that best quality
organisational and management arrangements for the Olympics are put in place to protect the
public purse and give London the greatest chance of winning the nomination for the 2012 Games
and to host them successfully if selected.
Proceeding by Agreement
4. The Government and Mayor of London would expect to proceed by agreement over
spending, revenue and cash management proposals.
Bid Period
5. DCMS and the London Development Agency propose to contribute to the costs of the bid
organisation and associated planning in equal shares to July 2005 to a combined limit of £30m.
DCMS’s contribution will not begin until 2004-05.
6. There is an offer of private sector subsidy of approximately half the bid campaign costs by the
London Business Board. The Government and the Mayor intend this to reduce equally the costs
falling on DCMS and the London Development Agency.
Land Assembly
7. The London Development Agency will meet the costs of required land assembly during the
bid period and beyond. Income from the sale of this land is at the disposal of the London
Development Agency. During the bid period the London Development Agency will only acquire
land which could be used for regeneration purposes should the bid not be successful.
Staging Period
8. The Olympics are likely to require a public subsidy if London is awarded the nomination. A
package of funding has been identified to cover the envisaged requirement. This is a combination
of funding by the Greater London Authority through an increased Council Tax precept to meet
Olympic Games costs (“the Olympic precept”), by the London Development Agency, from the
National Lottery, (subject to appropriate legislative changes) and ultimately from the Exchequer.
7

Timescale for Special Funding Streams
9. An increase in Council Tax precept to meet Games costs would not commence until 2006-07.
An hypothecated Olympic Lottery stream would not commence before 2005. The Government
and Mayor’s expectation is that special funding streams to meet Olympic costs should be closed,
having provided the necessary amounts, by 2013-14, except that where the Greater London
Authority has borrowed to meet capital costs of the Olympics it may be necessary to extend the
period during which the Olympic precept is levied to reflect the requirements of the prudential
framework for capital finance.
Funding Streams
10. The flow of funds will depend on the organisations that are nominated to deliver various
aspects of the Games. These details have not yet been fully worked up. Because rises or falls in one
sector of Olympic cost may be offset in another sector, it is not possible completely to earmark
particular strands of funding to discrete objects. Within that, the broad intention is that Lottery
funding should be primarily directed to sports investment, Olympic facilities and event staging
and that money raised from the Olympic precept should address the capital requirements of the
Games including transport infrastructure.
Elite Sport and Associated Sports Investment
11. Up to £300m of grants from the National Lottery would be sought to meet the costs of elite
sport and associated sports investment in addition to the National Lottery share set out in para 12
below.
Meeting other Olympic Costs
12. The broad intentions for funding in para 10 will be underpinned by an understanding that the
shortfall between Olympic costs and revenues (excluding the costs of elite sport and associated
sports investment (para 11)) will be met in the ratio 11:24, where 11 is the Olympic precept, and
where 24 is by grants from the National Lottery.
Amount of Public Subsidy
13. The proposals in para 11 and 12 are to apply to a funding package worth up to £2.050bn to
meet both the shortfall between Olympic costs (including elite sport and associated sports
investment) and revenues in the bid and staging periods. Para 15 to 17 deal with exceptional
circumstances beyond that.
Limitation on Lottery Funding
14. Total grants from the National Lottery during the bid and staging periods (including grants
for elite sport and associated sports investment referred to in para 11 above) are not planned to
exceed £1.5bn subject to para 17 below. In the event of a shortfall in the target amount of £1.2bn of
Lottery money intended to meet Olympic costs (excluding the elite sport and associated sports
investment in para 11 above), London funding would be made available on the basis and up to the
limits (£75m) set out in para 15.
An Additional £75m
15. Should the shortfall between Olympic costs and revenues exceed £1.75bn (excluding the
costs of elite sport and associated sports investment (para 11 above)), or in the event of a shortfall
in the target amount of Lottery money (of £1.2bn) (para 14), up to £75m additional funds would be
made available. This would come from the Olympic precept.
An Additional £250m
16. Should the shortfall between Olympic costs and revenues exceed £1.825bn (excluding the
costs of elite sport and associated sports investment in para 11 above), in addition to the sums
mentioned in paragraph 15, up to £250m from the London Development Agency would be made
available in keeping with their corporate plan. London Development Agency funding would be
made available no earlier than 2008-09.
8

Further Public Subsidy
17. The Government plans to be the ultimate guarantor of Olympic funding needs should the
shortfall between Olympic costs and revenues exceed £2.075bn (excluding the costs of elite sport
and associated sports investment in para 11 above). The Government expects to discharge that
responsibility (in respect of the shortfall above £2.075bn) in a sharing arrangement to be agreed as
appropriate with the Mayor of London and through seeking additional National Lottery funding
in amounts to be agreed at the time. These expectations will be further reviewed in summer 2005.
Surplus Hypothecated Lottery Funding
18. Subject to legislation, the Government will have regard to the overall position of the
National Lottery in considering what action to take should the proceeds from any hypothecated
Olympic Lottery games:
(a)

exceed, or appear likely to exceed, £1.2bn, or

(b)

i.

(b)

ii. the proceeds be greater, or appear likely to be greater, than twenty four thirty fifths of
the required subsidy.

in the event that the difference between Olympic costs and revenues (excluding elite
sport and associated sports investment in para 11 above), be less than £1.75bn; and

In the circumstances described in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), the Government is expected to have
a range of options in relation to the additional proceeds which might include, for example,
allowing those proceeds to benefit one or more National Lottery good causes. In this context and
subject to any decision the Government may make in relation to the additional proceeds in
connection with the National Lottery, it is the Government’s intention that the additional
proceeds will be used as follows:
●

half to reduce calls on or reimburse National Lottery grants towards elite sport and
associated sports investment (para 11), and any remaining proceeds from that half to the
Greater London Authority; and

●

the other half to the Greater London Authority.

Expectations of Government and the Mayor
19. Ministers expect to make any appropriate legislative changes. to assist in enabling Lottery
funding up to the target amount of £1.2bn (para 14) to be achieved.
20. Without prejudging the decision, Ministers will expect to consider in a constructive spirit any
case made by the Greater London Authority for legislative or procedural changes to enable the
more efficient financing and procurement of the Olympic Games.
21. Ministers and the Mayor recognise the importance of seeking cross party agreement to this
memorandum of understanding which is intended to persist beyond the life of the present
Parliament and London mayoral term.
22. Ministers and the Mayor plan to ensure that those involved in delivering the understandings
in this memorandum are given the necessary powers and authorities to do so.
9

23. In the event that additional public funds become available for the Olympic Games Ministers
and the Mayor agree to review the arrangements within this memorandum of understanding.
However, it remains the expectation of Ministers and the Mayor that the amounts set out in the
memorandum to be met by the National Lottery, Council Tax precept and the LDA would
continue to be available should they be required.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
06/03, 019585, 146700

10

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tso.co.uk/bookshop
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 702 3474
Fax orders 0870 600 5533
Email book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF10 1PT
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588

ISBN 0-10-158672-8

TSO Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers

9 780101 586726

