DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

National Museums and Galleries:
Funding and Free Admission
Government Response
to the House of Commons
Culture, Media and Sport Committee

Presented to Parliament
By the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
February 2003

Cm. 5772

£3.00

© Crown Copyright 2003
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

THE GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE HOUSE OF
COMMONS CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT COMMITTEE
REPORT ON NATIONAL MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES:
FUNDING AND FREE ADMISSION
Conclusion
(i)
Most importantly the UK’s museums and galleries are fun and fascinating places to visit.
(Paragraph 15).
Government Response
The Government welcomes the Committee’s recognition of the important role that the national
museums and galleries play in peoples’ lives. With the progressive introduction of Free Access the
number of visitors has climbed steadily from 24 million in 1997/98 to over 30 million visitors this year, a
magnificent testament to the importance of their role and to the success of the Free Access policy.
Conclusion
(ii) We welcome the eminently sensible adjustment to the Value-added Tax regime which allows
non-charging museums and galleries to reclaim their input VAT despite not operating formally
as businesses. We note that free local authority museums have been in this happy position since
1994 and we urge the Government to take a final logical step in extending this provision to free
university museums. On the figures put forward by the Museums association this step should not
prove unduly onerous to the Exchequer. (Paragraph 23).
Government response
Changes to the VAT regime are a matter for the Chancellor, subject to the European VAT Directive.
The VAT refund scheme was designed specifically to help deliver the Government’s pledge to ensure
free access to the permanent collections of national museums and galleries.
However, the Treasury has made clear that it would be no simple matter to refund VAT to the
University museums. Unlike the national museums and galleries University museums are not public
bodies, and within the directive which governs the EC VAT system, they are covered by the rules
governing the commercial and voluntary sectors. Were the Government to seek an extension to
University museums of the VAT recovery afforded to national museums, it would risk falling foul of
those EC rules.
Conclusion
(iii) We believe the financial flexibility should be included in DCMS’ programme for modernising its
relationship with museums and galleries. The Department should consider whether limited
freedoms to borrow for specific income-generating projects might be beneficial to the museums
and galleries and cost-effective for the public purse. We believe that, with sufficient risk
management provisions in place, such a course of action would not prove incompatible with a
rigorous public expenditure process. (Paragraph 45).
Government Response
The Government has yet to be convinced that there is a case for allowing the sponsored museums and
galleries to borrow, particularly when they already receive substantial grant-in-aid on top of their
self-generated income. Under the fiscal rules borrowing scores as public expenditure. Under
Government accounting rules, the general presumption is that borrowing must be guaranteed
explicitly by the Government, and that guarantees will not usually be given unless the terms offered by
the lender are at least as good as those which the Government could obtain in its own name. In most
cases public sector borrowers will be unable to meet that test. However, if the museums and galleries
can make a persuasive case the Government will consider it.

1

Conclusion
(iv) The museums and galleries sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport must
receive sufficient funding to avoid the situation which gave rise to the imposition of admission
charges in the first place. This is absolutely crucial. With the abolition of entry charges we
believe that this funding should, at least in part, be sensitive to a number of variables such as the
actual number of visitors to each institution - partly to reward success, partly to recognise wear
and tear. If additional costs accrue to museums as a result of the free admissions initiative, which
we applaud, the Government must accept responsibility for these consequences of its own
policy. (Paragraph 48).
Government response
The additional funding that the Secretary of State has allocated to Museums and Galleries following
the Spending Review is signal of the Government’s intention to fund Museums adequately to deliver
free access and, where appropriate, reward them for their achievements.
Conclusion
(v) Funding for the sponsored museums and galleries should not simply be a matter of a two-yearly
allocation of three years’ money with sporadic special requests between times. There must be a
more responsive process established including :
●

access to funds from other departments whose objectives are being served (such as for
example, the Department for Education and Skills and the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office); and

●

access to funds in recognition of the cost implication of new duties and responsibilities,
whether general or specific to the sector or an individual institution. (Paragraph 49).

Government response
The Government is introducing a number of innovations to the resource allocation process. From
April 2003 the Secretary of State will be allocating some grant-in-aid to sponsored museums and
galleries in response to bids to aimed at delivering specific policy priorities. This funding will support
partnership arrangements between national and regional museums and it will be complemented by an
additional stream of funding from the Department for Education and Skills towards improvements in
the educational use of museums. This will be the first time that funding has been made available to
sponsored museums and galleries on a cross-departmental basis.
On the question of new duties the Government accepts the principle that these should be adequately
resourced. So, for example in those cases where we have agreed with sponsored museums and galleries
that they will undertake a programme of reform either additional grant-in-aid has been made available
to support that or we have agreed, with Treasury approval, that major receipts may be retained and
used to offset other self-generated revenue for this purpose.
Where institutions are provided with funding to offer a specific service, such as free access, but decline
to provide it they can quite reasonably expect such funding to be withdrawn.
Conclusion
(vi) Museums and galleries must be better funded in the sense that the current process for allocating
funds, described as “opaque” by the museums, should be modernised as far as realistic.
Exchanges regarding each institution’s bid should be part of a transparent dialogue with clear
links to an overarching strategic vision for each body agreed with the Department which would
reflect better the long-term business of curatorial work. The burden of this process, however,
must be, proportionate to the potential return. If in reality decisions are dependent on the
Treasury’s fiat then either the Treasury must be involved “round a table” or the other parties
really should not waste each other’s time. (Paragraph 50).

2

Government Response
Decisions about funding are based on three main considerations : the strength of the case; the
availability of funds; and the strength of the case relative to competing demands. During the 2002
Spending Review officials gathered evidence from our sponsored Museums and Galleries, in
consultation with the National Museums’ Directors Conference. This was then used to support the
Secretary of State’s overall case for funding in discussions with Treasury and Cabinet and
subsequently to inform the allocations. Prior to the allocations there were discussions with
representatives of the Museums and Galleries at both official and Ministerial level. We are grateful to
the Museums and Galleries for the quality of their evidence which contributed greatly to the strength
of the case submitted and to the outcome obtained with the support of Treasury colleagues.
A key element of the Department’s strategy for Museums and Galleries during the Spending Review
was to protect their core funding, including support for their collections and curatorial expertise.
In terms of strategic vision each Museum or Gallery has a Corporate Plan which sets out its own
objectives. These are then linked to the Secretary of State’s objectives through a separate Funding
Agreement with each institution.
Conclusion
(vii) DCMS should certainly have taken the lead in establishing appropriate methodologies and
should now work towards establishing a common framework to improve the accuracy and
consistency of the counting and profiling of visitors for the purposes of improving policy.
(Paragraph 54).
Government Response
Following the Review of the Efficiency and Effectiveness of State sponsored Museums and Galleries
in 1999 DCMS, working together with members of the National Museums’ Director’s Conference and
expert consultants, prepared and field-tested detailed guidance on the gathering of visitor and other
performance indicator data. This guidance was issued to all the Department’s sponsored Museums and
Galleries in February 2000 and to the devolved authorities. DCMS has submitted a copy of the
guidance to the Committee.
Conclusion
(viii) Interdepartmental consultation is clearly necessary, especially with the DfES, to ensure that
there is the widest possible benefit from the policy of free admission to the national museums.
(Paragraph 59).
Government Response
We agree. DCMS and DfES are already discussing how to provide closer links between the delivery of
the Government’s cultural and educational objectives through Museums and Galleries. DfES is
contributing funding both to the development and extension of partnerships between National and
Regional Museums and to the related project to improve the delivery of cultural and educational
objectives through regional museums.
Conclusion
(ix) It is too early to draw firm conclusions about the actual impact of free admission, either for the
institutions directly affected or for the wider sector as a whole. However, emerging trends and
previous research indicate that free admission on its own is unlikely to be effective in attracting
significant numbers of new visitors from the widest range of socio-economic and ethnic groups.
We recommend that the Department consult on how best to tackle the non-financial barriers to
museum and gallery visiting to build on the overall increases in visit and visit numbers that have
undoubtedly occurred. (Paragraph 60).

3

Government Response
Evidence for the first full year of free access, from December 2001 to end November 2002, shows an
increase of 70% (nearly 4 million) in total visitors to our sponsored museums and galleries that
previously charged for admission, a 78% increase in child visitors and a 93% increase in visitors aged
over 60. The number of C2, D, E visitors appears to be up by 30% at the ex-chargers since April 2001.
At the South Kensington Museums the growth in visitors following the introduction of free access has
been 96%, restoring visitor numbers to the levels achieved before charging was introduced. Free
access has increased the number of visitors to our sponsored Museums and Galleries in the regions as
well. In the North West visits are up by 74% to almost 2 million.
All this is firm evidence of the emphatic success of the policy of free access in removing barriers to
admission but the Government will continue to look at and consult on ways in which access can be
widened still further through its policies for both national and regional museums. The broad aim of
these policies is to encourage the more extensive and effective engagement of museums and galleries
in childrens’ education, to increase admissions of people from groups of the population who have not
as a rule visited museums and galleries; and to improve access to the national and pre-eminent
collections, particularly in the regions of England. Funding will be targeted, through Resource to
provide direct support to regional hub museums and separately to the national museums and galleries
to encourage the further development of innovative and effective partnerships between national and
regional museums and other bodies.
Conclusion
(x) We wholeheartedly support the principle of free admission to the nation’s key artistic, cultural
and scientific storehouses but more specific work needs to be done to achieve the objective of
broadened access. Since the Government has called the tune, it must keep paying the piper.
(Paragraph 72).
Government response
We welcome the Committee’s support for the principle of free admission and for further work to
achieve the objective of broadening access. We will continue to ensure that our sponsored museums
and galleries are funded adequately to maintain free access and that the maintenance of free entry is a
condition of grant in the formal Allocation Letter to which the Funding Agreement refers. Examples
of the conditions of grant are set out in the allocation letters at Appendix 22 to the Committee’s report.

Printed in the UK for The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 127711 02/03

4

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tso.co.uk/bookshop
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Fax orders 0870 600 5533
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-call 0845 7 023474
Email book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF10 1PT
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square,
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries 020 7219 3890
Fax orders 020 7219 3866

ISBN 0-10-157722-2

TSO Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers

9 780101 577229

