DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the
Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee
Report on the Market for Art (HC414)
Session 2004-2005

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
July 2005

Cm 6643

£4.00

© Crown Copyright 2005
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE CULTURE, MEDIA
AND SPORT SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE
MARKET FOR ART, HC414, SESSION 2004-05.
Introduction
The Government is pleased to be able to present its response to the Committee, and outline how
we intend to take action, where appropriate, on the recommendations that have been given.
The recommendations made will be of interest to a number of departments across government,
and we are committed to working in a joined-up way, and with the supportive sector, to ensure
that work undertaken is of maximum benefit to the art form and us all.
Conclusions and Recommendations
●

(1) We recommend that the UK takes the important opportunity afforded by its
forthcoming presidency of the European Union to promote international co-operation
in cultural development. (Paragraph 9)

The Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) agrees with this recommendation and
has plans in place to promote such international co-operation.
During 15-17 September this year, Arts Council England, the English Regional Cultural
Consortiums and a number of other partners will host a conference in Liverpool and
Manchester entitled ‘Catalyst’. The aim of this conference, which we hope will attract up to 500
delegates from across the European Union, will be to encourage an exchange of ideas about
cultural entitlement and cultural learning in Europe. DCMS will provide up to £30,000 to
support the conference, and the European Commission has also pledged matching funding.
In November, there is also planned a conference in Manchester on the mobility of museums
collections. We hope that up to 100 expert delegates will attend this. The aim of the conference
is to make practical recommendations to increase the volume of loans between museums in
different member states. DCMS will provide up to £45,000 to support this conference, and the
European Commission has again pledged matching funding.
More generally, the Government hopes that the UK Presidency of the EU will see good
progress in discussions on a new Culture programme to build on the success of Culture 2000.
●

(2) We recommend that the Government commissions research aimed at providing an
accurate assessment of the primary, secondary and retail art markets. Only by such
research can government support for the visual arts be rooted in evidence and be of a
scale that is proportionate to the economic and wider societal benefits brought by art.
(Paragraph 21)

The Department for Culture, Media and Sport fully acknowledges the benefits of evidence
based policy, and is working hard to improve the evidence base across all of our sectors. Most
of the detailed research on specific sectors is commissioned by our Non Departmental Public
Bodies (NDPBs). We have ensured that Arts Council England are aware of this
recommendation, and are exploring options with them for taking this forward.
●

(3) We recommend that the DCMS actively pursues the development of best practice
guidelines for the art market. (Paragraph 32)

1

●

(6) We recommend that the Government establish a forum of interested individuals,
including artists, dealers and auction houses, to work towards identifying key areas of
agreed best practice in contractual relationships between artists and art market
professionals. Compliance with the code of practice that emerges should be a
prerequisite for the receipt of public funds. (Paragraph 38)

Recommendations 3 and 6 are answered together.
The Department for Culture, Media and Sport acknowledges the potential benefits of providing
best practice guidelines and will work closely with key stakeholders to assess how best this
might be achieved. The proposed forum of interested individuals would provide a way of
canvassing the views of key stakeholders, and we will consider it closely.
We are aware that a variety of arrangements already exist between artists and dealers and that
codes of practice for the visual arts are currently in use, for example a-n The Artists
Information Company’s Code of Practice for the Visual Arts. We would wish to build on these
when considering what might be needed. We expect any resulting guidelines to incorporate
advice on contractual arrangements.
We recognise that the market for the arts is a free market and that any guidelines would not be
compulsory. We do not plan to legislate in this area and the guidelines will have no legal force.
Furthermore we would ensure that any guidelines avoided imposing any unnecessary
regulatory or bureaucratic burdens on the industry.
●

(4) Auction houses represent an important sector of the art market in the UK.
However, some of the relevant legislation dates back to 1845. We believe a review is
overdue. (Paragraph 34)

The only legislation which seems to be specifically relevant to auction houses is the
Auctioneers Act 1845. The Department of Trade & Industry (DTI) has no evidence of
difficulties with the working of this legislation. In these circumstances, the DTI does not see it
as a current priority for review.
●

(5) We recommend that Arts Council England promotes the widespread adoption by
galleries, and other outlets, of practices modelled either on the Own Art scheme rules,
or on alternatives offering similar protection for both artist and art market
professional. (Paragraph 36)

The Own Art scheme requires all galleries to have written agreements with the artists that they
represent in order to protect the interests of both parties. The Arts Council believe that this
should be standard business practice throughout the industry from small independent galleries
through to major museums and other businesses that may from time to time act as agents for,
or contract the services of, artists and other arts practitioners.
●

(7) We recommend the further development of an online portal offering business
advice to artists, supporting networking opportunities, and providing access to the
arts more generally. (Paragraph 39)

This facility already exists through a-n The Artists Information Company, a not-for-profit
company limited by guarantee set up in 1980, with 25 years of research and publishing around
artists’ practice. It would be worth investigating the expansion of this service. We will consider
this closely.

2

●

(8) The Government should renew its efforts to achieve universal adoption of droit de
suite, through all available international channels. (Paragraph 45)

The DTI, which leads on droit de suite for the Government, agrees with the Select Committee’s
views that the universal adoption of droit de suite would reduce any adverse impact of the right
on the UK Art Market. The UK has pressed for this to be made a priority for the EU and will
continue to seek to exert pressure on the relevant parties with a view to having article 14 of the
Berne Convention made mandatory and the right applied internationally.
●

(9) We recommend that the Government closely monitors the impact droit de suite has
on the market. The Government should publish its conclusions in time to inform the
first review of the Directive’s impact which, according to its own provisions, must take
place by 1 January 2009. (Paragraph 47)

The Government accepts this recommendation and will review the impact of the Directive in
the UK. A study of the UK market will be commissioned and used as a baseline for future
measurements. This study will then be updated periodically to identify and track any changes
which have occurred following the introduction of droit de suite. The Government will aim to
publish these findings before the review of the Directive, currently scheduled for 2009.
●

(10) We recommend a system of compulsory collective administration for artists’
resale right. This is the preferred model throughout the European Union. It is
relatively efficient and better secures compliance, seeing that money reaches the
artist. (Paragraph 52)

The Government welcomes the Committee’s careful consideration of this issue. Our recent
consultation on the details of the implementation of the Directive has led to 147 responses from
interested parties. These responses will need to be carefully considered, together with the
recommendation of the Committee before a final decision can be reached.
●

(11) We are not intrinsically opposed to the introduction of the artists’ resale right into
UK law, though we do believe it should not benefit solely the richest artists. We
recommend that the Government lowers the threshold at which the resale right
applies from 3,000 to 1,000 euros. (Paragraph 55)

The Government welcomes the Committee’s careful consideration of this issue. Responses to
the recent consultation will need to be carefully considered and the views of the Committee will
help to inform the Government’s assessment.
●

(12) We recommend that the Government apply a royalty rate of 5% to the price band
up to 50,000 euros. (Paragraph 57)

Although this issue was not specifically raised in the recent consultation, the option of raising
the rate on the lowest price band has been explored. There are many advantages and
disadvantages to adopting this option and a number of respondents to the consultation have
expressed an opinion on this issue. The Government will need to consider all views received
before a decision is reached and welcomes the Committee’s contribution to the debate.
●

(13) We recommend an extension of the Gift Aid arrangements, so that donations of
significant art works to public collections can be offset against income tax.
(Paragraph 61)

●

(14) We note that the DCMS has implemented the Goodison recommendations in so
far as they apply to the Department. We look to the Treasury to follow suit. Where it
does not do so, justification, if any, for the corresponding decisions should be
published. (Paragraph 62)
3

Treasury, the lead Department on these areas, have grouped recommendations 13 and 14
together and responded as follows:
The Government has in place a wide range of tax reliefs for giving to all charities, including
museums and galleries. The Government believes these are generous and there is scope for
these to be used more widely. Where works of art are donated, these are exempt from capital
gains tax and inheritance tax. In addition, the Acceptance in Lieu enriches museum and gallery
collections. We will keep any proposals for new reliefs under review.
Since the publication of the Goodison Review in January 2004, the Government has made
substantial progress in taking forward many of the recommendations set out.
In the 2004 Spending Review the Government announced that:
●

annual funding for the National Heritage Memorial Fund will double by 2007-08,
compared to 2004-05;

●

the Renaissance in the Regions programme for regional museums will be extended to all
nine English regions; and

●

the free access commitment, which currently covers the main national museums and
galleries, and the VAT refund scheme that helps deliver free access, will be extended to
university museums and galleries.

Furthermore, HMRC (HM Revenue & Customs) have recently released externally a page in the
Business Income Manual on the costs of maintaining business archives. This manual is the
HMRC guidance on computing trading profits for tax purposes.
●

(15) We urge the Government to build on Creative Partnerships and actively to
encourage the provision of artists’ space in extended schools. (Paragraph 64)

The Creative Partnerships (CPs) programme, delivered through Arts Council England, endorses
this recommendation. The provision of artists’ space in extended schools would allow it to build
on existing work with extended schools in the 36 areas Creative Partnerships operates. Such
provision would facilitate the work of Creative Partnerships in developing long-term
sustainable relationships between schools and artists. In addition, it would make available a
valuable resource for the wider community, particularly in rural areas where the potential
benefits would be greatest.
Some good work is already underway, in Leicester, Creative Partnerships is building on its
existing residency work by collaborating with the LEA’s extended schools programme to
develop ‘community hubs’ in four primary schools with art spaces established under the Space
for Sport and Arts programme. The hubs – to be developed in partnership with the schools,
young people and creative practitioners – aim to build creative learning programmes through
which schools can meet the community focused parts of their development plans. In London,
the four Creative Partnership areas are set to support a partnership programme for up to 20 new
secondary schools and partner arts organisations to aid the implementation of the extended
schools approach.
Local Authority Provision
Local authorities provide varied support for artists including affordable arts space, incubator
programmes and professional development.
Affordable workspace:
(South East) Brighton & Hove City Council’s New England House offers workspaces at the
low end of the market rent scale. The units have been adapted for a variety of uses and
4

approximately 75% of occupants are in the creative industries sector (including artists).
Relatively low rents, close to the town centre and with ‘easy in, easy out’ terms means that the
building plays an important role in the city for creative start-ups and businesses moving into
their first commercial premises.
(Yorkshire & The Humber) Leeds City Council are working with the city’s property forum
to set up a sustainable system to match artists with vacant spaces before property developers
take over the space. If successful it will establish a computerised alert and booking system
where property developers can register space and artists can book that space for exhibitions or
a working studio.
Incubator programmes
(Derby County Council) are planning Incubator programmes that will allow a variety of startup organisations including the creative industries to develop into sustainable businesses.
They will provide small business start-up space and offer a programme of learning and
development and access to support agencies – for example accountancy, professional service,
tax lawyers and intense business support.
Professional Development
(East Midlands) Newark and Sherwood District Council are funding partners with Arts
Council England, East Midlands and Nottinghamshire County Council in Southwell Arts Space
Studios, a subsidised studios project. 6 artists will be selected and will have the opportunity to
work in a subsidised studio space and gallery as well as receiving mentoring, business support
and marketing guidance through project partners. The studio space will be available for 3 years
in order to make the project available to as many people as possible and ensure progression.
(East of England) Suffolk County Council are leading on ‘Making art work’, a professional
development scheme for visual artists. The scheme will offer one-to-one advice sessions,
creative renewal retreats (giving mid-career artists the chance to step back from their work and
engage in critical debate), coaching opportunities, how to sessions (on issues such as dealing
with finances, applying for grants and negotiation skills) and training days.
●

(16) We strongly support the four Arts Councils having continued status as
distributors of National Lottery funds. (Paragraph 70)

In its Five Year Plan published in March 2005, the DCMS announced that it will review how
National Lottery money has been spent so far on arts, sport, heritage and film projects and then
consult about how proceeds should be spent in these areas after 2009. A decision will be
announced in June 2006. All the existing good causes will be retained and the Department does
not propose ending the role of any of the existing distributors.
●

(17) The Department for Culture, Media and Sport must view the active promotion
and sponsorship of the arts as one of its primary roles. This is particularly important
in view of the large number of government departments with some claim to
responsibility for different locations in the world of art. Regrettably, in Government,
the Department seldom punches, if it punches at all, at a weight commensurate with
the centrality of the arts to our national life. (Paragraph 71)

As was stated in the written evidence presented to the Committee, DCMS, through Arts
Council England (ACE), encourages the development of new artists and innovative art. ACE
has a central role in supporting the development of the visual arts. Exchequer funding in the
arts has increased from £197 million in 1997-98 to £412 million in 2005-06.
5

DCMS is particularly committed to enhancing access to opportunities for young people,
ensuring they get the opportunity to develop their talents, whether in the visual or other
artforms, and promoting lifelong learning and participation. Our overarching strategy for arts
education is to identify coherent pathways for young people, whatever their background or
financial means, to progress from:
●

first access to art;

●

to opportunities to deepen their interest or develop their talent;

●

to support for the most talented; and

●

to making a living in the arts.

Current work under our key priorities for visual art includes:
First access to Visual Arts
–

DCMS is investing at least £155 million up to 2008 in the Creative Partnerships (CPs)
programme, a national initiative to develop sustainable partnerships between schools and
creative and cultural organisations and individuals. There have been 964 visual arts- based
projects supported by CPs to date. For example, CPs in Durham/Sunderland run a project
called ‘Creative Spaces’ with artist Lothar Götz. Lothar is working with staff and pupils at
Westlea Primary School in Sunderland to create an inspiring communal entrance area for
the school. Using blocks of brilliant colour and often dividing walls into bands and grids,
Lothar devises special colour schemes to accentuate the particular characteristics of the
buildings he works with. Lothar Götz uses walls as canvases to create 'walk-in' threedimensional abstract paintings, so that when encountering his works one feels to be inside
fields of saturated pigment. Each work is conceived specifically for the place for which it
is realised, and each is on an architectural scale, rather than that of conventional painting.
Götz is Senior Lecturer at the University of Sunderland;

–

the popular Artsmark scheme, managed by ACE, seeks to recognise schools in England for
their arts provision and requires them to dedicate a minimum amount of time per week to
art and design and to provide additional out of hours opportunities in art and design/the
visual arts. By May 2004, a total of 2,708 primary, secondary and special schools were
Artsmark schools. 27 per cent of all secondary schools are Artsmark schools.

Deepening interest and developing talent
–

the Young People’s Arts Award provides a means for young people aged 13-25 to increase
and sustain their participation and enjoyment in the arts. The Award is currently being
piloted by Arts Council England (ACE) in over 100 settings across the country. ACE has
allocated £700,000 in 2005/06 to roll out the programme nationally, with further funding
to follow;

–

there are now 304 Specialist Arts Colleges, many of which will be offering high quality
visual arts experiences. They are also having a positive impact on first access to the visual
arts in their feeder primary schools.

Support for the most talented
The national programme for gifted and talented education, led by DfES, is designed to support
gifted children and young people aged up to19 in all schools and colleges throughout England.
It provides support for those with ability in a range of different fields, including the artistically
talented.

6

Support for artistically talented young people is offered at local level through the gifted and
talented strands of the Excellence in Cities, Excellence Clusters and Aim Higher – all designed
to improve the education of those from relatively disadvantaged backgrounds. At regional level,
London Gifted and Talented (part of the London Challenge) is developing support for pupils
and teachers across London and this includes provision for the artistically talented. At national
level, support and guidance for educators of artistically talented pupils has been provided
through the online resource at www.creativegeneration.co.uk1 and the National Academy for
Gifted and Talented Youth are beginning to engage the arts sector more systematically in
providing outreach activities for the artistically talented.
Making a living in the arts
DCMS has been a keen champion and a member of the development group for the Creative and
Cultural Industries Sector Skills Council. The new body, Creative & Cultural Skills, is an
industry-led organisation which aims to have real influence over the supply of education and
skills across the UK.
It will ensure that employers and individuals have access to high quality education and skills.
It will aim to increase the vocational relevance of qualifications on offer and provide students
with informed choice on courses and career pathways.
The National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA), was established in
1998 to help create a vibrant, dynamic culture and economy by supporting and promoting
innovation and creativity in the UK. To this end, their aims are to help talented individuals reach
their potential, to help innovative ideas reach the market, and to contribute to public knowledge
and appreciation of science, technology and the arts. NESTA run a series of programmes
supporting innovation and creativity, two examples of which are:
–

the NESTA Creative Pioneer Programme, which focuses on the creative industries and the
unique issues facing individuals wanting to practice in the areas of design and the moving
image. The programme offers opportunities for personal and professional development for
creative graduates who are at the entry stages of their career. The programme offers a
residential course where graduates receive personal coaching alongside intensive
experiential training in business practice. They then have the opportunity to win an award
of up to £35,000 in start up finance; and,

–

the NESTA Fellowship Programme which is aimed at providing exceptional individuals
with the time, space and resources to pursue their creative goals, undertake speculative
research, experiment, break new ground and develop their talent. Help is in both cash and
kind with support tailored to individual needs. 20-50 ‘Fellows’ are selected each year, with
awards of up to £75,000 spread over 3-5 years.

NESTA also has a pilot fellowship project “Ignite”, launched in Autumn 2003, for
exceptionally creative young people aged between 10 and 21 years old. This is being piloted in
2003-04 and aims to reach young people “whose creative ability leaves you standing” and
provide them with opportunities to develop their potential.

1

Sponsored by DCMS, DfES, ACE, NESTA, Raising Standards and the Centre for British Teachers

7

●

(18) It is time for Government to commit itself to a flourishing arts scene.
And nowhere will such a commitment be more visible than in the visual arts.
(Paragraph 72)

Government acknowledges the need to do all it can to maintain the vibrancy of the current arts
sector. As stated in the written evidence presented to the Committee, Government already
commits a lot. Due to a combination of free entry and capital investment in new gallery spaces,
many more people have been able to enjoy and experience contemporary art. Since the opening
of Tate Modern, with free admission, in May 2000 and the introduction of free admission at the
V&A, in combination with the opening of the British Galleries, the number of visits to DCMSsponsored Art Galleries has increased by 6 million per annum from 9 million to over 15 million
(an increase of 67 per cent). This national trend has been further enhanced by the provision of
new gallery spaces in the regions, such as the Baltic in Gateshead and the Walsall Art Gallery.
Many contemporary regional galleries, such as the Ikon in Birmingham, also provide free
access.
These galleries mount regular exhibitions of cutting edge contemporary art, widely supported
by the public.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
07/05 19585 180957 312280

8

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tso.co.uk/bookshop
Mail,Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF10 1PT
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
TSO Accredited Agents
(See Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers

