ANNUAL REPORT 2006

This document is part of a series of Departmental Reports (Cm 6811 to Cm 6838) which,
along with the Main Estimates 2006-07, the document Public Expenditure Statistical
Analyses 2006 and the Supplementary Budgetary Information 2006-07, present the
government's expenditure plans for 2005 to 2008.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Annual Report 2006

Department for Culture,
Media and Sport –
Departmental Annual Report 2006

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary
of State for Culture, Media and Sport and
the Chief Secretary to the Treasury by
Command of Her Majesty, May 2006.
Cm 6828

01

£21.00

OUR AIM IS TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY
OF LIFE FOR ALL THROUGH CULTURAL
AND SPORTING ACTIVITIES, SUPPORT
THE PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE, AND
CHAMPION THE TOURISM, CREATIVE
AND LEISURE INDUSTRIES

© Crown Copyright 2006
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquires relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to The
Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723 000 or email: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

02

FOREWORD BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FOREWORD BY THE PERMANENT SECRETARY

04
06

PICTURE GALLERY

08

HIGHLIGHTS OF THE YEAR

20

CHAPTER ONE
DELIVERING OUR STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

24

PART ONE
PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

26

CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
COMMUNITIES
ECONOMY
DELIVERY
LONDON 2012 OLYMPIC AND PARALYMPIC GAMES

30
40
56
66
70

CONTENTS
PART TWO
BBC CHARTER REVIEW

72

PART THREE
PERFORMANCE AGAINST OUR PUBLIC SERVICE AGREEMENT (PSA) TARGETS

74

CHAPTER TWO
MANAGING OUR RESOURCES

98
100

DCMS ORGANISATION CHART
TABLES

110
112

INDEX
ENQUIRIES
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

124
125
126

03 CONTENTS

CULTURE

Embroidered linen doublet
from the 1650’s
2012 OLYMPICS

The 80,000 seat Olympic Stadium
will be built at the heart of the new
Olympic Park in east London
ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND

Jenny Beavan is a ceramic artist based
in Cornwall. She is artist in residence at
Imerys Minerals, St Austell. Isolated
within this cube is a small piece of clay.
The ‘crystals’ are growing and constantly
changing
ART

School children copying a
Frida Kahlo painting at Tate Modern
SPORT

Sport England Active Sports
Talent Camp

FOREWORD
The last 12 months have been incredible for this country. Fantastic achievements and terrible events,
and moments when the country has come together to come to terms with both. And so much of
what has happened – for good or ill – has had a connection with my Department and what we do.
Winning the Olympic bid in July was a fabulous achievement, and a tribute to the drive,
determination and imagination of the hundreds of people who worked so very hard to make it
happen. As we said in the bidding process, the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games represent a
once in a lifetime opportunity and lasting legacy for the whole of the UK. The transformation of one
of our capital city’s most deprived areas is already well underway; the Games will inspire a new
generation of sporting heroes; and the economy will be boosted throughout Great Britain.
Of course our sporting achievements didn’t end there. English sportsmen and women demonstrated
once again the success that can be achieved when investment in sporting opportunities meets pride
and ambition in our young people. We remain committed to this, from supporting schools sports to
increased assistance via our Talented Athlete Scholarship Scheme.
Another of our commitments has been in securing a strong and independent BBC, through the
Charter Review process. This is the result of a massive public consultation. We were determined to
get the views of as many people as possible, which is exactly what we did. So thank you to all those
who took the time to offer their opinions.

04

RT HON. TESSA JOWELL MP
Secretary of State for Culture,
Media and Sport

Still with broadcasting, in
September we announced that
Digital Switchover will start
from 2008. As this will be a
major technical and logistical
challenge affecting most UK
households, the switch will take
place on a region by region
basis. All the evidence from the
two towns used in the trial
proved that the switch from
analogue to digital will be a
huge – and permanent –
benefit to all viewers.
Reform and modernisation have
also been at the heart of our
legislative programme. The
implementation of the Gambling
Bill in April was joined by the
largest reform of our licensing
laws in 40 years, in November.
Both are first and foremost about
treating adults like grown-ups,

while giving real power back to
local communities and their
elected representatives.
We have also taken the
National Lottery Bill through
Parliament, aiming to make the
Lottery even more responsive
to the public. We are proud
that our National Lottery is
one of the most successful in
the world and has raised over
£18 billion for good causes.
On top of this, the fruits of the
2004 Spending Review meant
that we were able to increase
support for museums,
particularly outside London.
And who can forget the Live 8
concert, made possible by
DCMS and The Royal Parks.

This is an invaluable service that
now provides humanitarian
assistance to all British victims
of major disasters. Last year
the people it helped included
those affected by the Asian
Tsunami, the Turkish and the
London bombings.
Thank you to everyone at
DCMS and our sponsored
bodies for a truly remarkable
year – including Sue Street and
my Ministerial team, Richard
Caborn, David Lammy and
James Purnell. We wish Sue the
very best for the future as she
moves on after being Permanent
Secretary for nearly five years;
I am enormously grateful for
the contribution she has made.

Sadly we had to create the
Humanitarian Assistance Unit.

05 FOREWORD

HERITAGE

Medieval figurine
2012 OLYMPICS

The world-class facilities at Weymouth
and Portland host sailing events
EDUCATION

Interactive display, National
Science Museum
SPORT

Girls’ rugby
CULTURE

Marble statue
V&A

FOREWORD

06

DAME SUE STREET DCB
Permanent Secretary

I am proud to present our
Annual Report to Parliament
for 2005-06 and to record my
appreciation to our Secretary
of State, Tessa Jowell, and to
her Ministerial team, for their
leadership of the Department.
Just about everyone in the
country uses, cares about or is
employed by the people, places
and institutions we work with.
This puts a great responsibility
to succeed on our shoulders.
For me, our year was exemplified
by just two days – the 6th and
7th of July 2005. I was one of
thousands out in Trafalgar
Square as the word “Lon-don”
boomed out from the Olympic
Committee in Singapore. And I
will never forget how fiercely
DCMS staff had fought to win,
or how loudly they cheered.

But the next day the bombs
went off in London. Tessa Jowell
took personal responsibility for
ensuring that the victims and
their families were well
supported at an horrendous
time. The Department worked
with tremendous energy,
compassion and focus to
support her in her role.

for DCMS. I shall be leaving
a department that has the
commitment, energy and
capability to meet the
challenges that lie ahead. The
future of our sectors and our
world class institutions is
bright, and their contribution
to our quality of life and the
economy goes from strength
to strength.

On both days, the Department
rose to the occasion. But we
also ensured that it was
“business as usual” throughout
the very broad span of our
core work.
That’s some trick to pull off.
But DCMS colleagues did it
then and do it every day. I
couldn’t be prouder of them.
This is my last Annual Report
as their Permanent Secretary

07 FOREWORD

7,000 NEW JOBS WILL BE CREATED
TO BUILD THE OLYMPIC PARK

08

09 PICTURE GALLERY

CREATIVE INDUSTRIES GREW BY AN AVERAGE
OF 6% PER ANNUM BETWEEN 1997 AND
2003, COMPARED TO 3% FOR THE ECONOMY
AS A WHOLE

10

11 PICTURE GALLERY

12

SIX OF OUR SPONSORED MUSEUMS
AND GALLERIES ARE AMONG THE TOP 10
MOST POPULAR FREE TO VISIT TOURIST
ATTRACTIONS IN THE UK

13 PICTURE GALLERY

THE BIG LOTTERY FUND DISTRIBUTES 50% OF
THE MONEY RAISED FOR GOOD CAUSES BY THE
LOTTERY, TRANSFORMING MANY PLACES AND
LIVES ACROSS THE UK

14

15 PICTURE GALLERY

16

THE GOVERNMENT IS ON TARGET TO INCREASE THE
NUMBER OF SCHOOL CHILDREN PARTICIPATING IN
TWO HOURS A WEEK OF HIGH QUALITY PE AND
SCHOOL SPORT TO 75% BY 2006, AND 85% BY 2008

17 PICTURE GALLERY

18

THE 2012 LONDON OLYMPICS WILL TRANSFORM
THE PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC LANDSCAPES
IN THE POOREST AND MOST DEPRIVED AREAS
OF LONDON

19 PICTURE GALLERY

LONDON 2012 OLYMPIC BID
6 July 2005, will go down in history as one of the greatest days ever for the United Kingdom and
British sport. The International Olympic Committee’s (IOC) decision to award the 2012 Olympic
Games and Paralympic Games to London was a tremendous honour and achievement and a
wonderful tribute to the skill and passion of all those involved in the bid. We now have a once in a
lifetime opportunity to stage the greatest show on earth and to transform the UK’s sporting, cultural
and social landscape.
The 2012 Games will leave a lasting legacy for the entire country. The Games will deliver thousands
of new jobs and homes, a huge range of opportunities for businesses of every size up and down the
country, and will transform one of the most deprived parts of London. There will be a four-year
cultural festival and a massive boost to tourism. The Games will also inspire a new generation to
greater sporting activity and achievement and will help to foster a healthy and active nation.
Preparations are already well underway. The London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Bill
received Royal Assent in March 2006 - just nine months after the IOC’s announcement. Twenty days
after London’s success, the first Lottery scratchcards were launched to help fund the games; at the
end of March, we had exceeded the 2005-06 income target. Work has already begun on the Olympic
Park site and 80,000 people had registered an interest in volunteering for the Games.

HIGHLIGHTS
LICENSING REFORM
The Licensing Act 2003, the most radical shake up of our licensing laws in 40 years was implemented
in November 2005. This followed an intense transition period during which around 190,000 licences
were agreed for individual premises and over 300,000 personal licences were approved by the new
licensing authorities.
The modernised licensing law, which covers the supply of alcohol and the provision of regulated
entertainment and late-night refreshment, provides local communities with a greater say in licensing
decisions. The reforms deliver a balance of tough new sanctions to deal with problem premises and
irresponsible licensees, whilst increasing choice and freedom for the public.
As with any major reform, a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation programme has been put in
place, and this will inform any future developments.

LIVE 8 CONCERT
This event, facilitated by The Royal Parks and DCMS, saw Hyde Park hold the biggest ticketed event in
UK history. The Royal Parks met Hyde Park’s cost for holding this event and co-ordinated the event
managers, emergency services and local authorities to ensure that the concert site could manage the
large and enthusiastic crowds in safety. Over 200,000 people watched the event in the main arenas in
Hyde Park while thousands watched on big screens across the UK.

20

REFORMING GAMBLING
The Gambling Bill became an Act in April 2005. Its implementation will modernise the regulation of
all forms of gambling and in particular provide greater protection for children and vulnerable people.
It will also, for the first time, provide a regulatory regime for online gambling. The Gambling
Commission, the new, tough, gambling regulator, was established in October 2005. The Casino
Advisory Panel was also appointed then to advise the Secretary of State on the locations for the
17 new casinos allowed by the Act. The Panel will report at the end of 2006. We are working closely
with the Commission, local authorities, the industry, community groups and other stakeholders to
implement the Act in autumn 2007.

DIGITAL SWITCHOVER
The UK leads the world in digital television. Seventy per cent of UK households are already enjoying the
greater choice and improved reception that come with digital television. We want all UK households to
benefit. But it is only by switching off the analogue network and moving to digital only broadcasting that
we can ensure everyone who currently receives analogue television can choose digital television through
an aerial.
In September 2005, we announced that Digital Switchover would take place from 2008 on a region
by region basis, starting with the Borders region. The programme will be completed by 2012.
Digital Switchover will be a major technical and logistical challenge affecting almost all UK
households. Digital UK will be responsible for coordinating the programme and making sure all
viewers know what is happening. 2006 is an important year for preparations, and will mark the start
of a major communications campaign to raise public awareness.

DCMS and the DTI will continue to be closely involved in the implementation of digital switchover
through the digital switchover programme which includes representatives of Digital UK and Ofcom.

DEVELOPING THE NATIONAL LOTTERY
Our National Lottery is one of the most successful in the world and has raised over £18 billion for
good causes since 1994. Over the past year we have been taking the National Lottery Bill through
Parliament, and have actively sought people’s views on future priorities. The Bill aims to make the
Lottery even more responsive to the public. This includes funding good causes that the public see as
important, streamlining the process and distributing funds more quickly, and maximising the return
to good causes by effective competition and regulation. The consultation will help us decide what
share should be spent on arts and film, heritage and sport in the period after 2009, and what the
policy priorities should be.
In November 2005 the National Lottery Commission launched the competition for the third Lottery
licence by issuing its Statement of Main Principles. The detailed terms of the competition are
expected to be finalised by June 2006, with a view to awarding the licence in mid-2007.

21 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE YEAR

INCREASING FUNDING FOR MUSEUMS
As a result of the 2004 spending review, support for museums dramatically increased. There were above
inflation rises for the national museums’ running costs, guaranteeing free admission for the three years to
2007-08. By December 2005, a 66 per cent increase in visits to former charging national museums
was seen. Visits to former charging London museums were up by 65 per cent while visits to national
museums in the regions increased by 72 per cent since December 2001. Capital funding was also
increased from 2005-06 to help ensure that museum buildings are in good shape to welcome the
increase in visits. Capital funding for museums and galleries is due to increase by nearly 82 per cent
in 2006-07, with a further increase of nearly 49 per cent in 2007-08.
Our leading regional museums enjoyed a 50 per cent funding increase in the investment programme,
“Renaissance in the Regions” that is transforming these museums into centres of excellence.

HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE UNIT
In 2005, the Secretary of State was given responsibility for the provision of humanitarian assistance
to British victims of major disasters, building on the work DCMS had carried out to support those
affected by 9/11, the Bali bombings and the Indian Ocean tsunami.
Following the bombings in London on 7 July, the Humanitarian Assistance Unit was created to
continue this work. The Unit has worked with families bereaved by the bombings in London, Egypt,
and Turkey. Memorial services have been held for the tsunami and the London bombings and a
service is being planned for those affected by the Egypt, Doha and Turkey bombs.

Over the next year the Unit will work with partners in central and local government to embed
humanitarian considerations in emergency response planning, to ensure that the UK is ready to
meet the needs of people affected by any future incidents. It will continue to support those
affected by terrorist attacks in 2005 and will ensure that their experiences inform the
Government's learning and planning process.

A STRONGER INDEPENDENT BBC
The existing BBC Charter expires on 31 December 2006 and we are introducing a new Charter
covering the subsequent 10 years. The White Paper and drafts of the new Royal Charter and
Agreement have been issued, following the most comprehensive consultation ever of a BBC
Charter. Once in place, these will ensure that the BBC remains strong and independent, setting
world-class standards across a wide range of programmes. Technology, and the broadcasting market
are changing rapidly, so we have defined the BBC’s role and scope more clearly than before
through a new set of purposes. Measures have also been proposed in the White Paper and the draft
Charter and Agreement to ensure the BBC becomes more transparent and directly accountable to
licence fee payers.
In a step change for the BBC’s governance we will abolish the BBC Governors and replace them
with two new bodies; a BBC Trust and a separate Executive Board which will run the BBC’s services.
The BBC Trust will oversee the Executive Board and will be the licence fee payer’s voice. It will act
as a proxy for the BBC’s shareholders, making it the first public interest body on this scale the
country has ever seen.

22

CONTINUING OUR COMMITMENT TO SPORT
The past sporting year has been one of high achievement, in particular the performances of the men’s
and women’s England cricket teams in reclaiming the Ashes and Liverpool FC’s triumph in the UEFA
Champions League. The celebrations of these triumphs will not only be remembered by all who
experienced them, but serve as a reminder of the immense power of sport in bringing people together.
We have continued to build towards our goal of creating an active and successful sporting nation,
particularly through substantial investment in sporting opportunities for our young people. We are
meeting our targets to ensure that our children have access to good quality school sport and PE,
and significant progress has been made to promote competition in school sports.
We have reversed the decline in the numbers and condition of playing fields and have provided extra
assistance to over 1,000 of our most promising young sportspeople through the Talented Athlete
Scholarship Scheme.

CREATIVE ECONOMY PROGRAMME
We have launched a Creative Economy Programme which is the first step towards our goal of making
the UK the world’s creative hub. The programme looks at seven key productivity levers for the creative
industries through a twin track approach of investigatory groups and industry consultation. We hope
that the programme will push forward policy development in the creative industries and deliver real
improvements to the support that Government gives to the Creative Industries.
In addition to this, the reform of film tax relief and the introduction of a new Cultural Test for
British Films will support the Government's aim to promote a sustainable British film industry. More

generous rates of support offered by the new tax relief will reward the use of British film making
content, facilities and practitioners. Targeting the support in this way will help Britain to continue to
grow as a world leading location for film making, with a wealth of film making talent, as recognised
by British success in this year’s Oscars.

EU PRESIDENCY
The UK’s Presidency of the EU Council of Ministers ran from July to December 2005. We achieved
many important goals during the Presidency. Political agreement was reached on several EU funding
programmes, a new action plan for the digitisation of cultural heritage was agreed, and good
progress was made on an initiative to facilitate the mobility of museum objects and collections
throughout the Community.
We jointly hosted a major European Audiovisual Conference with the European Commission in
Liverpool. It facilitated expert discussion of the revision of the 'Television Without Frontiers’ Directive.
We led the Government’s delegation on the negotiations in Paris on UNESCO’s Cultural Diversity
Convention. As the climax coincided with the UK Presidency of the EU, we were able to lead the
25 EU Member States in the negotiations, ensuring the adoption of the Convention.

23 HIGHLIGHTS OF THE YEAR

24

CHAPTER ONE

25 CHAPTER ONE

CHILDREN

Community carnival
TOURISM

London Eye at night
SPORT

Student playing basketball

PERFORMANCE
AGAINST OUR
We are responsible for the Government’s work in supporting and promoting the rich array of
activities that enhance our quality of life: the arts, sport, the National Lottery, tourism, libraries,
museums and galleries, broadcasting, creative industries including film and architecture, press
freedom and regulation, licensing, gambling, the historic environment, the listing of historic
buildings and scheduling of ancient monuments, the export licensing of cultural goods, the
management of the Government Art Collection and the Royal Parks.
We are the lead Government Department for the preparations for the 2012 London Olympics
and the Secretary of State, Tessa Jowell, is Minister for the Olympics.
In May 2005 we broadened our links to the creative industries by taking over responsibility for
fashion design, and the art market from the Department for Trade and Industry (DTI). We now
also work jointly with DTI on design issues (including sponsorship of the Design Council),
advertising and on relations with the computer games and publishing industries.

26

The Secretary of State and her Ministerial team set our strategic aim and five strategic objectives.
Our Strategic aim is: “To improve the quality of life for all through cultural and sporting activities,
support the pursuit of excellence, and champion the tourism, creative and leisure industries.”
Our Strategic objectives are:

CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE

Further enhance access to culture and sport for children and give them the opportunity to
develop their talents to the full and enjoy the benefits of participation.

COMMUNITIES

Increase and broaden the impact of culture and sport, to enrich individuals’ lives, strengthen
communities and improve the places where people live, now and for future generations.

ECONOMY

Maximise the contribution which the tourism, creative and leisure industries can make to
the economy.

MODERNISING DELIVERY

We are modernising delivery by ensuring our sponsored bodies are efficient and work with
others to meet the cultural and sporting needs of individuals and communities.

OLYMPICS

Host an inspirational, safe and inclusive Olympic Games and Paralympic Games and leave a
sustainable legacy for London and the UK.

PART ONE
STRENGTHENING
OUR STRATEGIC
CAPACITY
A small ‘Think Tank’, established
in our Strategy Division last year
has strengthened our strategic
capacity to think about the longterm cross-cutting challenges we
face. Our new national household
survey, Taking Part was launched
in summer 2005, in partnership
with our strategic NonDepartmental Public Bodies
(NDPBs), Arts Council England,
English Heritage, Museums,
Libraries and Archives Council
and Sport England. Over time
the survey will significantly
strengthen our evidence base.
We have also hosted several
seminars to discuss with a
number of academics, and
leading thinkers, their work on
our sectors. We continue to
develop evidence based policy

training to strengthen these
skills within the Department.

WORKING IN
PARTNERSHIP
NON-DEPARTMENTAL PUBLIC
BODIES (NDPBS)
Over 97 per cent of our funding
goes to NDPBs; our sponsored
bodies. Effective partnership with
them is vital for the delivery of
our strategic objectives. During
the past year we have put in
place revised three year funding
agreements that focus on how
NDPBs deliver value to the
public, allowing us to monitor
progress more effectively. We
have also facilitated sharing
good practice by setting up peer
reviews, such as that of Arts
Council England, and networking
events, and collecting useful
management information for a
central database.

27 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

THE PRIVATE SECTOR
We value the close working relationship which we have with a wide range of private sector bodies
and businesses for our economic objectives and priorities, but also for the delivery of our social
objectives. This is vital for the development of policy in broadcasting, licensing, gambling, tourism,
and in the creative industries. Often these partnership links operate through or with other
departments or relevant NDPBs and also involve trade and professional associations. There will be a
continued need for successful working together in the future; in some cases with even more
emphasis on strategic issues rather than just narrower sectoral ones.
THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR
We have continued to strengthen relations with the voluntary and community sector (VCS), holding
meetings with our VCS Forum and key NDPBs. Our focus has been on developing the Compact (the
agreement between Government and the VCS to improve their relationship for mutual advantage as
set out in a series of Codes of Good Practice), capacity building and volunteering. Responses received
from the report A Giving Culture have helped us to prioritise for the year ahead, including better
communication and reform of delivery.
The Year of the Volunteer was a joint initiative between the Home Office, Community Service
Volunteers (CSV) and Volunteering England. DCMS played an active role in raising awareness by
promoting volunteering to all staff. CSV offered DCMS employees the chance to volunteer in team
challenges and school partnerships including reading and mentoring in schools. Eight teams took part
in challenges, ranging from gardening and painting in allotments and community centres, to clearing
a conservation area.

REGIONAL WORKING AND REGIONAL CULTURAL CONSORTIUMS
We continue to work closely with a range of regional partners to help achieve our broader objectives,
ensuring that culture is recognised as crucial in the regions. Key bodies are the Regional Cultural
Consortiums (RCCs), which bring together DCMS regional agencies and other partners to develop
broader cultural strategies. The Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) also have the remit to deliver
regional support for tourism. This year, six of them have been reviewing their regional economic
strategies.
Work at regional level on cultural aspects of government policies and programmes is undertaken
within the Government Offices for the Regions. During 2005 a new online system was introduced
within the Government Office network for reporting on progress against the priorities of
Government Departments. For DCMS the Government Offices report on a range of tasks including
Local Area Agreements, regional strategies and major projects.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
One of our priorities is to strengthen our links with local authorities. They spend £3.2 billion a year
on culture and leisure; more than DCMS, our NDPBs and the Lottery combined.
Culture and leisure are uniquely placed within local authorities because they are the services with
which people choose to get involved. We continue to work with partner organisations in central and
local government, including the Local Government Association (LGA) and the Improvement and
Development Agency (IDeA), to ensure that local people get the maximum benefit from money
spent on local cultural services.

28

LONDON 2012

An external view of the
Olympic Stadium from the
Olympic Park

In December 2005, a dedicated
cultural services assessment
was featured in the Audit
Commission’s Comprehensive
Performance Assessment (CPA)
of English single tier and county
councils. Twenty per cent of
county and unitary councils
obtained the maximum score
for their cultural services. DCMS
is continuing to strengthen
performance in local authority
cultural services and to promote
the cultural contribution to
Local Area Agreements by
working with our NDPBs.
BEST PRACTICE
Our strategic partnership
with IDeA, beginning with
the launch of the Cultural
Connections website

(www.idea-knowledge.gov.uk),
has been progressed through
the initiation of a three year
project to promote
improvement in local authority
culture and leisure services. The
project is centred on the work
of a new cultural services
improvement unit at IDeA,
jointly funded by DCMS and its
strategic NDPBs.

TWINNING WITH ENGLISH
REGIONS
The PA Consulting report,
Extending Your Reach,
highlighted the requirement for
DCMS to develop a better
understanding of the needs of
local authorities, and improve
policy making by considering
regional issues.

We have also continued to
work with the Cultural Services
Excellence Network of local
authorities and with the LGA
on the cultural pathfinders
programme; as well as having
lead government responsibility
for the Beacon Council round
seven theme of Culture and
Sport for Hard to Reach Groups.

In response to the
recommendations, we
introduced a twinning
programme, where a DCMS
Board member has strategic
responsibility for a region. They
will build relationships with key
stakeholders to ascertain the
priority issues for the delivery
of cultural services and use
that to inform policy.

29 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

CHILDREN AND
YOUNG PEOPLE
We recognise the important contribution that “things to do and places to go” can make to the
lives of children and young people, not only by helping to improve educational achievement,
but also increasing their confidence, motivation and enjoyment of life. We have continued to
work in partnership with the Department for Education and Skills (DfES) on their Every Child
Matters: Change for Children Programme, and on Youth Matters, the Green Paper published this
year. We also worked with the Home Office on the Respect Action Plan.

30

SPORT AND CHILDREN’S PLAY
INCREASING SCHOOL SPORT
The National School Sport Strategy continues to transform PE and school sport as a direct result of
the joint DCMS/Department for Education and Skills (DfES) investment in the five years leading up
to 2008. The Youth Sport Trust continues to work with government on this. We are well on the way
to delivering this year’s Public Service Agreement (PSA) target of 75 per cent of children doing at
least two hours of high quality PE and school sport each week, increasing to 85 per cent by 2008.
Our programmes aim to ensure that young people maintain active involvement in sport beyond
school. Through the Club Links programme, 22 per cent of pupils in partnership schools participated
in one or more sports clubs linked to their school or the partnership. The 2006 target was 20 per
cent, so we have already achieved notable success.
Partnership schools are a family of schools, which come together to increase and enhance sports
opportunities for all pupils. An average partnership is made up of a sports college, acting as the hub,
eight secondary schools and 45 primary/special schools. Each partnership school has Club Links for
an average of about five different sports. The Government is also setting up 800 Multi-skill Clubs for
primary school children by 2006.

PHYSICAL EDUCATION

Brettenham School physical
education class

An average of 11 per cent of 14-19 year olds in partnership schools are actively involved in sports
volunteering and leadership through the Step into Sport programme. This has enabled over 4,000
volunteers from partnerships to undertake volunteering in their communities.

The National Strategy has also seen progress with the implementation of the new structure of
Competition Managers. They enhance schools nationally and locally, creating more competitive
opportunities across all ages and supporting young people in joining clubs. The first 20 managers
are now in post and are already a great success. We can also now look forward to the National
School Sport Games, for which £6 million has been set aside, to be organised annually in the run up
to the 2012 Olympics.
PROTECTING PLAYING FIELDS
More playing fields are now being created or improved than are being lost. The most recent report
on the numbers of planning applications relating to a playing field site, demonstrates that of 959
approved applications, just 52 were deemed to be detrimental to sporting provision. In the same
period, 72 new playing fields were created and almost £317 million was invested in new facilities
and developments to benefit sport. Although this progress is encouraging, we are not complacent
and will continue to work to improve the protection of playing fields.
TACKLING OBESITY
Childhood obesity is forecast to rise by 0.5 per cent every year. If current trends continue, at least
one fifth of boys and one third of girls will be obese by 2020.
In order to tackle this issue we have teamed up with the Department of Health (DH) and DfES,
nationally and regionally, to integrate sport, health and education.
Progress against the Public Service Agreement target to reduce obesity will be measured through
the Health Survey for England and the data will be available by early 2007.

31 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

ENCOURAGING YOUNG ATHLETES
The Talented Athlete Scholarship Scheme (TASS) helps young people pursue their sporting goals while
continuing their academic studies or employment. The programme covers 46 sports, 15 of which are
for disabled athletes. Over 1,000 athletes have participated so far.
We increased funding from £3 million to £4 million a year in 2005. The extra £1 million was
allocated to TASS 2012 Scholarships, a new fast track strand. There are currently over 100 12-18 year
olds on the programme, who are considered to be our most talented athletes with potential to win
medals in future Olympics and Paralympics. Each athlete receives up to £10,000 of world class
sporting services and support.
From April 2006, responsibility for managing TASS will be transferred from Sport England to UK
Sport. This is to ensure that it is closely aligned to other talent development programmes, and
establish a more coherent link between TASS and UK Sport’s World Class Performance Programme.
PROMOTING CHILDREN’S PLAY
We have continued to fund three play organisations:
• Skillsactive is jointly funded by DCMS and DfES to develop a national programme for training and
qualifications in play and to provide regional training centres
• The Children’s Play Council for policy and research work
• The Children’s Play Information Service, a library and web-based information service to support play
practitioners.

The formal government response to the review Getting Serious About Play, said we would be working
to develop a more strategic approach to play policy. In response, we have established a crossdepartmental group which has met four times this year.
In March 2005, the Big Lottery Fund announced that one of its new funding programmes would give
£155 million to create children’s play provision in England and develop innovative practice. Eighty per
cent of this will be used to develop free, open-access play provision in all local authority areas. The
remaining twenty per cent will be divided between an innovation fund and a regional support and
development infrastructure.
A further £324 million will be dedicated to helping communities in England improve their local
environment. This will include £90 million for parks, run in partnership with the Heritage Lottery Fund.

32

COMMUNITY

Carnival celebration
MUSEUMS

Silver swan automaton
The Bowes Museum

ARTS
ENCOURAGING CREATIVITY
AMONG CHILDREN AND
YOUNG PEOPLE
We jointly commissioned with
DfES an independent Creativity
in Schools Review to look at
what more we can do to nurture
young peoples’ creativity. Paul
Roberts, Director of Strategy,
Information and Development
from IDeA (Improvement and
Development Agency) led the
review, which reported to
Ministers in March. We are
currently considering the
findings in relation to our future
policies and the Departments
Creative Economy Programme.

Creative Partnerships is a
flagship programme giving
schoolchildren aged 5-18 and
their teachers the opportunity
to explore their creativity by
working on projects with
creative people and
organisations.
Following the launch of the
third phase of the programme
in September 2005, there are
now 36 Creative Partnerships
across the county. These are
primarily concentrated in areas
of economic and cultural
deprivation or those suffering
from rural isolation. Over 1,400
schools have already directly
benefited from the programme,
with over 400,000 student
attendances at projects.

DCMS is also supporting three
Cultural Hub pilots taking place
in Durham, Bournemouth/Poole
and Telford. The pilots, jointly
developed by Arts Council
England and the Museums,
Libraries and Archives Council,
seek to explore different ways
of providing more coordination
to the delivery of high quality
cultural opportunities for
children and young people. All
three involve a consortium of
cultural organisations and local
schools that will deliver
programmes from September
2005 to March 2007. We are
investing £1.5 million per year
to support these pilots.

33 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

ARTS AWARDS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
The Arts Award was launched in October 2005 following a successful pilot run by Arts Council
England (ACE). The award provides a qualification accredited by Trinity College London. Young people
aged 11-25 can take the award at Bronze, Silver or Gold levels and on successful completion achieve
a qualification at level 1, 2 or 3 on the National Qualifications Framework. It provides a means of
recognising young people’s engagement with the arts and can provide an attractive and accessible
pathway to lifelong participation in the arts, and for some young people will open the door to a
career in the creative industries.
ACE will run the Award in collaboration with Trinity Guildhall and nine Arts Award Agencies, one in
each of the English regions. These agencies began training Arts Award advisers in November, setting a
target of 1,000 by autumn 2006. The advisers will then support 10,000 young people to achieve the
award by 2008.
ARTS AWARDS FOR SCHOOLS
Artsmark rewards schools that show a commitment to the full range of the arts. In England, 3,067
schools have now achieved the Artsmark award, which equates to 13 per cent of schools across
the country.
PROMOTING AND SUPPORTING DANCE
Dance Links, the dance-specific project run as part of the PE, School Sports and Club Links strategy
has successfully completed its first phase with the production of Dance Links: a guide to delivering
high quality dance for children and young people. Youth Dance England will roll out the second phase
in spring 2006 helping to build links between schools, dance practitioners and clubs.

34

Arts Council England (ACE) and
the DfES continue to support
Youth Dance England. ACE
provides new project funding
to establish a regional
infrastructure of youth dance
officers across the country. This
maximises opportunities for
young people to be involved in
dance in their local area.
We have recently established
the first DCMS Dance Forum,
which will be contributing to
government dance policy as
well as the Dance Links project.
The Forum consists of key
figures in the sector who can
shape our future dance policies.
Dance has been identified as a
physical activity that can
contribute to the joint obesity
PSA target held by us, DH and
DfES. ACE and DCMS are

working closely with the DH to
respond to various health
initiatives and promote the
value of dance.
PROMOTING AND
SUPPORTING MUSIC
The Music Manifesto is a unique
collaboration between DCMS,
DfES and over 450
representatives from music
organisations, the music
industry, arts and education
charities and trusts. It provides
a shared vision for improving
music education across the
country over the next three to
five years. Three work-streams
are producing recommendations
for development in key areas
across the music education
sector. Work will soon begin in
the three Music Manifesto
Pathfinders at The Roundhouse

in London, The Sage Gateshead,
and The Halle in Manchester.
Youth Music is a national
charity that funds and
facilitates high quality and
diverse music making for young
people up to the age of 18,
particularly those living in areas
of social and economic need.
It has granted funding awards
nationally totalling over
£53 million and reached over
one million children and young
people. It has created
employment for over 8,000
music leaders and trainees and
its funding awards have
reached 98 per cent of the
local authority areas in
England. By 2010, it aims to
have reached more than three
million young people.

The Music Manifesto provides a shared vision for improving music
education across the country over the next three to five years.

DANCE

Students from Nottingham
Emmanuel School take part
in The Royal Ballet School’s
Dance Inclusion Project
showcase performance in
July 2005
YOUTH MUSIC

High quality and diverse
music making for young
people
EDUCATION

Physical exercise class

35 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

SPACE FOR SPORTS AND ARTS
The £134 million Lottery and Exchequer funded Space for Sport and Arts programme has provided
269 new or refurbished facilities for curricular and community use in primary schools in highly
deprived areas. These range from Chillingham Road Primary School in Newcastle-upon-Tyne with its
new community sport and arts facility, to Woodlands Primary School in Medway with its new theatre
and multi-arts facility. Now nearing its end, the programme has been a huge success with almost all
facilities complete and over 100 funding projects underway. It is being evaluated using questionnaires
and case study research. A DVD is in production to illustrate its success and disseminate lessons learnt.
CULTURE ONLINE – MANAGING CREATIVE PROJECTS
Culture Online was set up to increase access to the arts and culture through the innovative use of
technology. It has commissioned 25 interactive projects, 35 short films, three CD-ROMs and the first
hit single to be released by a Government Department (We Laughed, by Billy Bragg and Maxine
Edgington in October 2005).
Building on its reputation for delivering highly targeted interactive resources, Culture Online projects
have won 12 prestigious internet awards, including three BAFTA Interactive awards and a United
Nations World Summit award. Projects include:
• STAGEWORK – a website that gets behind the scenes at the National Theatre showing the creative
processes that produce exciting performances.
• CITY HERITAGE GUIDES – presents up-to-date cultural information for 10 vibrant cities, written by the
people who love them. This enables real and virtual visitors to explore their cultural richness and heritage
• ICONS – an online collection of England’s most cherished cultural treasures from Big Ben to a cup
of tea, as voted for by the general public.

MUSEUMS
CHILDREN BENEFITING FROM INVOLVEMENT
Last year the total number of visits to our sponsored museums by children aged 16 and under was
nearly eight million.
The Renaissance in the Regions programme, bringing central government support to our greatest
regional Museums, has seen a 24 per cent increase in the numbers of children benefiting from these
institutions.
MUSEUMS EDUCATION
DCMS is working with DfES and the museums sector to unlock the full potential of museums and
galleries to support education through schools, early years, family and lifelong learning programmes.
The work is helping to enhance delivery of the curriculum at all key stages. As well as the traditional
areas of art and history, it includes science, ICT, citizenship, design and technology and the teaching
of literacy and numeracy. We confirmed our continuing commitment to the programme by
announcing an increase in our joint funding to £9.4 million from 2006-07.
The programme is also funding short term secondments for teachers and museum professionals, to
help their professional development and contribute to support for every child in England.

36

BUILT ENVIRONMENT

School project using the
built environment to teach
LIBRARIES

Secondary school library in
East London

The Summer Reading Challenge maintained literacy levels during the school
summer holiday among the 600,000 children who took part, and generated over
35,000 new young library members.
ARCHITECTURE
ENGAGING PLACES
This is a new DCMS initiative
to unlock the educational
potential of the historic and
contemporary built environment.
It aims to address the issues
that the DCMS/DfES Advisory
Committee on Built Environment
Education identified as hindering
wider public engagement
concerning heritage and the
built environment and is
supported by a partnership
with English Heritage and the
Commission for Architecture and
the Built Environment (CABE).
It will be a valuable tool in
increasing the number and
diversity of people who actively
engage, support and contribute
to the built environment.

Engaging Places will start in
September 2006 with three
pilot projects tied into the
2006-07 school year. Held in
London, the South East and
Yorkshire and the Humber, they
aim to streamline the supply of
built environment learning
resources to meet the demands
of teachers and schools.

LIBRARIES
AN INVALUABLE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT SERVICE
Public Libraries encourage the
creative development and
reading skills of young people
and are a highly visible and
invaluable local government
service. They are particularly
attractive to families and young
people, who are supported by
specialist librarians. The

24 million children’s books in
the public library service
account for nearly 90 million
loans every year.
Ninety-nine per cent of English
library authorities now
participate in the annual
Summer Reading Challenge. In
2005 this maintained literacy
levels during the school
summer holiday among the
600,000 children who took
part, and generated over 35,000
new young library members.
There were significant
developments during 2005-06
to the Bookstart programme
which provides young children
and their families with free
packs of quality books, advice
and tips on how to enjoy
sharing them together and a

37 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

personal invitation to join the library. Bookstart is co-ordinated by the independent charity Booktrust
and is a public-private partnership. An increase in Government funding to expand the programme
was matched by sponsorship from over 25 children’s publishers and Red House books. The extended
programme now provides all families with young children aged 8 months, 18 months and 3 years
with free, quality Bookstart packs.
The extended programme was launched in October 2005 and 100 per cent of local authorities are
committed to supporting its delivery. Over 450,000 Bookstart baby packs were delivered in 2005-06
and the roll out of Bookstart + for 18 month old children and My Bookstart Treasure Chest for 3 year
olds is now underway.

YOUTH MATTERS
During the year we have worked closely with DfES on the production of the youth Green Paper,
Youth Matters, and we continue to work together on its implementation.
Youth Matters is good news for our sectors. For the first time, sporting and cultural activities will
become an integral part of the Children and Young People’s services planning process, operated by
local authorities through Children’s Trusts.
Also with DfES, we are planning a reformatted statutory duty on local authorities. Legislation will
allow for statutory guidance setting out “national standards” covering a range of activities that
should be available to young people, including sport and a wide range of other recreational and
cultural experiences.

We are involved in the pilot of the youth opportunity card, which is intended to give children and
young people access to a range of discounts on activities, venues and products to buy from high
street stores. There is also a mechanism for government to support those less well off, by topping
up the card.
RESPECT
The Respect Action Plan, published by the Home Office in January, links to our work on Youth
Matters. It recognises the enormous benefits that activities can have for young people. Taking part in
sport and volunteering helps them to develop as individuals, find new interests and aspirations and
make a positive contribution to their communities.
The Plan states our intention to work with the regional tiers of Sport England, the Museums, Libraries
and Archives Council and Arts Council England. This ensures that within the Respect target areas,
current funding is more effectively channelled into community sport and cultural activities that
target disadvantaged groups helping those most at risk of anti-social behaviour.
The Plan also confirms our £1 million funding over the next three years to develop and expand the
Sports Championing mentoring programme and expand it to other cultural sectors.

38

URBAN SPORT

BMX display
RUGBY

Secondary school physical
education
BREAK DANCER

REDUCING YOUTH CRIME
AND ANTI-SOCIAL
BEHAVIOUR
Our sectors have continued to
play a key role in providing
quality activities through the
Positive Activities for Young
People programme (PAYP).
Aimed at 8-19 year olds at risk
of committing crime or
becoming socially excluded,
PAYP is a programme that
draws together several
government departments. It
helps young people test
themselves in a range of new
and challenging situations within
a supportive environment. Last
year, 141,000 young people
took part, with 70 per cent
saying that they felt more
able to get on with adults and
75 per cent saying they had
learnt new skills.

Children participated in a
debate on whether the parks
should be used to provide
EDUCATION IN THE
resources for social housing or
ROYAL PARKS
maintain the parks for healthy
The Royal Parks have been
living. The event was attended
involved in a wide range of
activities involving local schools by over 1,000 young people.
and other partners:
Get into Green Spaces – A
Leisure and Tourism school sixth youth adults partnership
form student placement – During introduction scheme between
their two week work placements the Royal Parks and The Prince’s
Trust held over one week in
the students examined the
Bushy Park was attended by
current information on notice
15 young people. The project is
boards, looked at the range of
a pilot exploration of the range
occupations available in landof occupations within the landbased skills and produced
based industry and how they
posters which would attract
young people to the Royal Parks. can be accessed. The second
year sessions will begin in
September 2006.
Living History programme on

THE ROYAL PARKS

the Victorians – A four-week
programme for Key Stage Two
was held in Greenwich Park.

Urban dance performance

39 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

THE MINI GAMES

Tug of War, Disability Sports Events (DSE)
PARALYMPIC WORLD CUP

British basketball team
CYCLING

Westminster, London
FOOTBALL

Blind Football World Cup

COMMUNITIES
We are working to ensure that culture and sport play their part in delivering cross-government
objectives and targets. We are in partnership with the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister on
the Sustainable Communities programme, where we have aligned our key public bodies to
support growth areas and promote the role of culture in regeneration.
We have supported design quality and use of public space as part of the Cleaner Safer Greener
Communities programmes, and seen sport and culture form a key part of delivery in
Neighbourhood Renewal areas. We work with the Home Office in delivering community
cohesion programmes by promoting culture and sport in diverse communities.

40

SPORT
PROMOTING COMMUNITY SPORT
Our objective on community sport is challenging: to increase sports participation across the
country and to keep people active through a network of clubs, coaches and volunteers.
We are keen to address current inequalities in participation which is why our target to increase the
number of adults benefiting from sport focuses on priority groups: women, people with a physical
or mental disability, people from minority ethnic groups, and those in lower socio-economic groups.
We also want to harness the excitement of hosting the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2012 to
drive up levels of participation in sport and physical activity across the whole of the country.
We will also continue to enhance the sustainability and visibility of local sports providers, not least
through the Community Amateur Sports Club Scheme which has already brought total benefits
worth some £11 million to over 3,500 local clubs and associations.
EQUALITY IN SPORT
We are committed to breaking down the barriers which prevent people from getting involved in
sport. We continue to fund and work closely with Sporting Equals, the Women’s Sports Foundation
and the English Federation of Disability Sport to increase the opportunities available to black and
ethnic minorities, women and disabled people.

41 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

The Equality Standard for sport
is being implemented by
national governing bodies and
other partners of Sport England
as a framework for organisations
to improve their structures and
awareness, so that sport becomes
more accessible to everyone.
The Inclusive Fitness Initiative
has used £6 million from the
National Lottery to provide
high-quality gym equipment to
thousands of disabled
sportspeople. One hundred and
and eighty public sector not for
profit sites and seven private
sector sites will be operational
by spring 2006.
FACILITIES
We recognise that one of the
obstacles preventing people
from playing sport in their
communities is a lack of good

sports facilities.
Between 2002-06, Government
and the National Lottery
distributing bodies will have
committed over £1 billion to
develop new or refurbished
public sports facilities. This
represents a considerable
investment in our facilities
infrastructure.
For the first time, the Audit
Commission has also included
sport and leisure facilities
within the Comprehensive
Performance Assessment for
local authorities.
By investing in sports facilities
programmes such as Active
England, the New Opportunities
for PE and Sport and the
Community Club Development
Programme we aim to ensure

that every community has
access to as wide a range of
facilities as possible and that
the opportunities to use them
exist for everybody.
Our aim is that by 2008, most
people will live within
20 minutes of a good multisports environment, such as a
school, sports club or leisure
centre. This is defined as a
20 minute walk in an urban
environment and a 20 minute
drive in a rural environment.
INVESTMENT IN SPORTS
FACILITIES PROGRAMMES
The New Opportunities for PE
and Sport has provided £581
million in England for new and
refurbished community sports
facilities in schools. By February
2006 over 2,200 facilities had
been awarded funding.

Our aim is that by 2008, most people will live within 20 minutes of a good
multi-sports environment, such as a school, sports club or leisure centre.

42

The Community Club
Development Programme helps
community sports clubs to
increase participation and widen
access by providing £100
million to National Governing
Bodies of Sport in the period to
March 2008. By February 2006,
over 690 projects had been
awarded funding.
The Active England programme
encourages the development of
innovative new and modernised
sports facilities. Some are
located with other services such
as Primary Care Trusts. £108
million is available to March
2006 and is supporting almost
250 projects, 221 of which are
already completed.
Sport England’s Active Places
website provides a comprehensive
picture of public sports facilities

across the country. Last year this
was enhanced by Active Places
Power designed to help local
authorities and sports
organisations identify gaps in
sports facility provision and to
form strategies for future
investment.
The Football Foundation has
invested over £30 million.
This has funded 1,500 facility
projects, 200 changing
pavilions, 100 artificial turf
pitches, provided 113 schools
with new football facilities
and over 100,000 children
with new football strips.
REFORMS OF THE SPORTING
LANDSCAPE
If we are to meet our objective
of creating an active and
successful sporting nation we
must ensure that our delivery

bodies are fit for purpose. The
Secretary of State announced
a series of reforms to the
sporting landscape that will
bring greater clarity to the roles
and responsibilities of Sport
England and UK Sport.
The key outcomes will be to
enable Sport England to focus
its energies on delivering the
Government’s objectives in
increasing sports participation
whilst streamlining the
administration of elite sport.
From April 2006, there will be a
reorganisation to ensure a clear
alignment of responsibility for
the three key aspects of sport
policy: elite, youth/school, and
community sport.
We have also made progress
towards the Government’s
commitment to create a new

SPORT

Hockey game
KELLY HOLMES

Sainsbury’s active kids
campaign
SPORT

Girls’ rugby

43 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

National Sports Foundation from April 2006. This will exist to generate greater private sponsorship to
support grass-roots sport. DCMS will provide £34.5 million funding between 2006-08.
SPORTS COACHING
Between 2004-08, a total Government investment of £60 million has been allocated to deliver key
areas of work in sports coaching strategy:
Community Sports Coach Scheme: by January 2006 there were 1,761 full and part time coaches in
place. We are on target to achieve a network of 3,000 by the end of 2006.
UK Coaching Certificate: the core content of the UK Coaching Certificate levels 1-5 has been
completed. Five National Governing Bodies have been endorsed and are delivering the qualification.
Coach Development Officers (CDOs): a network of 45 CDOs has been established to work closely
with County Sports Partnerships to identify demand and deliver coaching education.
SUPPORTING HIGH PERFORMANCE SPORT
2005 was another exciting year for high performance British sport. In particular, the England Cricket
teams (men and women) won the Ashes; the England football team came top of their qualifying
group for the 2006 FIFA World Cup and Liverpool FC won the UEFA Champions League.
DCMS continues to support the UK’s very best athletes through UK Sport’s World Class Performance
Programme. Over £98 million is being invested in our best talent between now and 2009 as part of
the run up to the Beijing Olympics and Paralympics. In addition, £20 million was announced in the

March 2006 budget to assist in the preparation to give our athletes the very best chance of success
in 2012, with further funding to be raised via sponsorship. The programme invests directly in the
National Governing Bodies to fund world class coaches, sports science, training opportunities, competition
costs, athlete development programmes, training facilities and the post of a Performance Director.
Before Beijing, our athletes will compete in a range of international competitions. Recent events
include the Turin Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games and British athletes competing under their
home country flags at the Melbourne Commonwealth Games. The Paralympic World Cup 2005 was a
real success for British athletes and the event will be held again in Manchester in 2006.

ARTS
INCREASING PARTICIPATION
Through our arts Public Service Agreement (PSA) target we have challenging goals to increase
attendance and participation amongst under-represented groups.
Arts Council England (ACE) is a major delivery partner for the sector but we also recognise the need to
engage with other influential organisations, for example local authorities, who form the second
largest source of funding. This has resulted in the establishment of an Arts PSA Project Board, set up
with representatives from the Arts Council, voluntary and community sector, local authorities and
special interest groups, to advise on how best to stimulate further demand for the arts.
ACE has also developed a diverse portfolio of partnerships to increase involvement. Currently
10 per cent of ‘Grants for the Arts’ go to Black and Minority Ethnic artists and 11 per cent of Regularly
Funded Organisations are black and minority ethnic-led.

44

ART

School children copying
a Frida Kahlo painting at
Tate Modern

WORKING IN PARTNERSHIP
We recognise that to deliver our
goals we have to work with a
variety of partners in central and
local government and in the
private and voluntary and
community sector. Through these
partnerships the arts can reach a
wider range of people including
those who are often socially
excluded. This work is underpinned
by the belief that the arts can
transform lives and communities,
and that everyone should have
the opportunity to participate.

DCMS and the DH have also
commissioned research to
evaluate the benefits and social
outcomes of involvement in
arts projects for people with
mental health problems.

ARTS COUNCIL REGULARLY
FUNDED ORGANISATIONS
Last year, across the country,
many Arts Council Regularly
Funded Organisations made
significant progress towards
opening up the arts to a wider
audience and helping to engage
communities. After receiving
£47 million of Lottery funding,
Last year, the Arts Council, in
partnership with the Youth Justice and now £3 million per year
from the Arts Council, the Sage
Board adopted a strategy
Gateshead enjoyed a successful
specifically addressing Young
People at risk of re offending. This first full year of operation and
work covers a range of situations, will continue to enrich music in
the North of England.
from prevention to community
sentences through custody and
into resettlement.

Our National Companies
continued to encourage a wider
audience to watch world-class
productions. Both the Royal
Opera House and English
National Opera saw thousands
participate in their outreach
programmes, ROH2 and ENO
Baylis.
In 2006, the Royal Shakespeare
Company will embark on the
ambitious Complete Works and
an equally impressive, part Arts
Council-funded, redevelopment
project in Stratford-upon-Avon.
The major transformation of the
South Bank Centre in London is
continuing, with the Royal
Festival Hall now undergoing its
much needed refurbishment. The
first phase of the project has
already been completed and the
Royal Festival Hall will re-open
in 2007.

45 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES
VISITOR NUMBERS CONTINUE TO INCREASE
DCMS sponsors 22 museums and galleries that offer free admission. Last year they attracted
36 million visits, a 22 per cent increase since the introduction of free admission in 2000.
The free admissions policy is also helping to attract new visitors to the national collections. Last year,
admissions by people from under-privileged social groups increased by 27 per cent and admissions by
people from black and minority ethnic groups increased by 22 per cent. Funding for regional
museums through the Renaissance in the Regions programme has also seen equally impressive results
with a 22 per cent annual increase in visitors from both groups.

HERITAGE
INCREASING PARTICIPATION
Working with English Heritage we successfully delivered our PSA target (to attract a total of 100,000
visits by new users from minority and socially deprived groups to the historic environment by 200506) a year early, with 323,478 visitors. This was achieved through events, outreach activities and the
partnership with Heritage Open days.

Working with English Heritage we successfully delivered our PSA target
(to attract a total of 100,000 visits by new users from minority and
socially deprived groups to the historic environment by 2005-06) a year
early, with 323,478 visitors.

The Heritage Open days have continued to see a steady increase in property, organiser and volunteer
numbers. In 2005, 3,019 properties participated compared to 2,800 in 2004. Working with the
English Heritage Outreach team, a significant effort has been made to include socially and ethnically
diverse properties. Last year Heritage Open Day included 10 synagogues, a Muslim burial ground,
four Sikh temples, three Buddhist temples, three Hindu temples, two multi-faith centres and a
multi-cultural festival.
To help the wider sector and associates engage with priority groups, English Heritage and the National
Trust are hosting a two-day conference in November 2006, “Engaging new audiences with Heritage”.
HERITAGE PROTECTION REVIEW
2005 saw the first of the reforms introduced by the Heritage Protection Review with the transfer of
the administration for listing buildings from DCMS to English Heritage. The Review aims to open up
and simplify the heritage protection system used to protect and manage historic buildings,
archaeology, parks, gardens and battlefields. Following the transfer, English Heritage has introduced
further improvements to the current system. They are now notifying owners when an application to
list their building has been submitted, as well as the local authority, and are producing clearer
information for owners to help them understand what listing their property means.
DCMS has also carried out a public consultation on new criteria to be used when assessing buildings
for listing, to make the process easier to understand. A final version of the new criteria will be issued
in partnership with Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM) in 2006.
We have also been developing detailed plans for longer term reforms to the heritage protection
system in England and will publish our further proposals in 2006.

46

WORLD HERITAGE
This year the UK continued to
provide support to communities
at home and in developing
countries under a bilateral
arrangement with UNESCO.
One key project links the
Dorset and East Devon Coast
World Heritage Site and St
Lucia in an initiative aimed at
providing UK expertise to
develop local community
involvement. This includes
education programmes
promoting accessibility, and
encouraging effective coastal
zone management. Our focus
for 2006 will be community
projects in Sub-Saharan Africa.
SIKH TEMPLE

Shiri Sabha Sikh Gurudwara,
Southall, London
HADRIAN’S WALL

Through its membership of the
World Heritage Committee, the
UK has actively encouraged the

committee to develop a
strategy to manage the impact
of climate change on World
Heritage Sites. To support this,
the UK will host a working
group in Paris to prepare a joint
report on Predicting and
managing the effects of climate
change on World Heritage for
consideration at the next
meeting in July 2006.
In 2005, Hadrian’s Wall was
included in the first section of
the Frontiers of the Roman
Empire trans-national World
Heritage Site, which also
includes the Upper German
Raetian Limes. The UK
nominated the Cornwall and
West Devon Mining Landscape
for inclusion on the World
Heritage List.

LIBRARIES
IMPROVING PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Public Libraries are among the
most valued of all public
services. Nearly half the
population visit a library at
least once a year and most
users visit much more regularly.
Visits are up 20 million over
the last three years and are
especially valued by the less
well-off and people from ethnic
minorities.
Libraries are working with a
number of high profile partners
to encourage reading. One
example is the three year BBC
Reading and Writing campaign
to improve the reading and
writing skills of adults aged
between 25-54.

47 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

The Reading Agency’s Vital Link Project is promoting reading for pleasure to motivate existing
students and engage new learners. It is building libraries’ capacity to support adults with low literacy
levels. Individual projects like the Agency’s Big Book Share can help particular groups. The “Share”
helps parents in prison contribute to their children's reading development by letting them choose
books to read on tape for their families at home.
We welcome partners in our efforts to encourage better library services; particularly the Big Lottery
Fund’s decision to allocate £80 million over five years towards the creation and improvement of
community libraries. Evidence suggests that investment to improve these buildings is rewarded by
renewed community interest and increased visits.
Following the publication of the report on the public library stock supply chain in March 2005, we
have been working with the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council and the libraries sector on
phase 2 of the project to look at the various options identified in the report in more detail. The
project will generate efficiency gains to allow extra expenditure on public-facing library services
such as opening hours or acquisitions.

CULTURAL PROPERTY UNIT
The Cultural Property Unit balances the need to ensure that our most outstanding cultural treasures
are, wherever possible, retained in this country and made accessible to all, against the rights of
owners and the need to support a healthy and legal art market.

Over the last year we have:
• Through the work of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art enabled Reynolds'
painting of The Archers to be acquired by the Tate, and Lawrence's drawing of Mary Hamilton by the
British Museum.
• Provided indemnities that have allowed many popular exhibitions to take place, including the
exhibition “Rubens: A Master in the Making”, at the National Gallery and “Spectacular Miracles:
Images of supernatural power from Northwest Italy” at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and will
continue to underwrite similar superb exhibitions.
• Organised a conference for 91 delegates from 24 of the 25 EU countries as part of the UK EU
Presidency. We will now continue with other Members States, including accession states, to find
practical ways to encourage museums to share our joint European heritage through increased lending.

GOVERNMENT ART COLLECTION
The Government Art Collection (GAC) promotes Britain’s culture and history by displaying works of art
in major government buildings in the UK and around the world: www.gac.culture.gov.uk
The display, selection, commissioning of art and the maintenance of the Collection are central to the
GAC’s role. This year our activities have included these projects:
• The eagerly anticipated new Home Office building opened with art commissioned by the GAC.

48

GOVERNMENT ART
COLLECTION

Home Office public art,
Commissioned by GAC
CULTURAL PROPERTY

Sir Joshua Reynolds, The
Archers. Acquired by the Tate
GOVERNMENT ART
COLLECTION

Damien Hirst, Pardaxin 2004
LIBRARIES

People’s Network, Norwich
Millennium Library

• Marking the UK’s Presidency
of the EU, works by British
artists were displayed at the
EU Council building in
Brussels. These included video
pieces by John Wood and Paul
Harrison; a painting by
Damien Hirst; and ink
drawings by Layla Curtis.
• New works were acquired
for the Deputy High
Commissioner’s Offices in
Chennai. Displays were also
installed at Embassies,
Residences, and High
Commissions in New Delhi,
Brasilia, Canberra, Cape Town,
Pretoria and Skopje.
• Major new acquisitions
included an 1830 portrait by
Sir George Hayter of the
daughters of Baron Stuart De
Rothesay, British Ambassador

to France; a sculpture Our
Distant Relatives (2004) by
Jane Simpson; and Fantôme
Creole Series (Papillon no. 1)
(2005) a photographic diptych
by Isaac Julien.
• Conservation has been
undertaken on several works
of art including paintings by
Peter Lely, Jacob Knyff and
Carel Weight; and works on
paper by Ozias Humphrey and
Terry Frost.
• Access to works in the
Collection has been improved
by the development of the
web site and published
material. Tours of the GAC are
now offered with British sign
language interpretation.

Forthcoming projects include:
• The provision of an interior art
strategy for the Department
of Constitutional Affairs’ new
premises.
• Working with the FCO to
commission art for new
British Embassies in Sana’a,
Yemen; and Doha, Qatar;
while new displays of art are
planned for Residences in
Vienna and Seoul.
• Publication of a booklet, Art at
the Home Office, and an art
trail for children to accompany
the public art commissioned
by the GAC on behalf of the
Home Office for its new
central London building.

49 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

COMMUNITY RADIO
During 2005, Ofcom awarded more than 60 community radio licences, the first of which have gone
on air. These not-for-profit radio stations have a social purpose and work to involve their local
community in running the service.
It is recognised that the essential core activities involved in running a station can be the most difficult
to find funding for. These include management, administration, fundraising, community outreach and
volunteer organisation and support. In order to assist we have made available £500,000 through
Ofcom. This level of funding is committed until at least 2007-08.

NATIONAL LOTTERY
NATIONAL LOTTERY BILL
This year we have been managing the National Lottery Bill’s passage through Parliament. The Bill will
modernise and simplify the way Lottery grants are distributed and make the Lottery more efficient and
responsive to the public’s priorities. It will provide tools to ensure that Lottery distributors reduce
excessive balances, getting money out of the door and into communities as quickly as possible. For
example, the formal merger under the Bill of the Community Fund and the New Opportunities Fund to
become the Big Lottery Fund, will realise administrative savings of between £6-12 million per year.
The Bill will put the National Lottery Commission in a better position to run an effective licence
competition, with a view to maximising money for good causes. The Bill completed its Commons
stages in January 2006 and despite a challenging Parliamentary schedule, is anticipated to achieve
Royal Assent by the summer.

50

NATIONAL LOTTERY
PROMOTIONS UNIT
The National Lottery Promotions
Unit continued its work to raise
positive public awareness of,
and support for, the benefits of
National Lottery funding across
the UK.
The Unit’s key achievements
included:
• Two successful media
campaigns that raised positive
public awareness of Lottery
funded projects and individuals.
• Rolling out the National
Lottery common brand logo
for use by the Lottery
distributing bodies and the
recipients of Lottery grants.
• Organising the National Lottery
Awards. These communicate
the diversity and high level of

Lottery funding across the UK
and highlight the work of
projects that had received
Lottery funding.
• The successful delivery of
300 events nationwide for
National Lottery Day on
5 November 2005 to
celebrate what the Lottery
has funded.
2009 LOTTERY SHARES
CONSULTATION
We undertook a major online
public consultation on the
future share of National Lottery
money for the arts and film,
heritage and sport after 2009.
It proved to be the most
successful Lottery consultation
in recent years with over
10,000 responses. These came
from interested members of

the public, Lottery ticket
buyers, those who do not play,
Lottery grant beneficiaries, and
professionals working for good
causes.
The consultation closed at the
end of February 2006 and we
are currently analysing the
results. We will present our
findings and the decisions which
arise in the summer of 2006.

SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Engagement with sustainable
development has risen steadily
within DCMS. Working with
established groups, we continue
to actively promote sustainable
development practice both
within the Department and our

Over the past year we have been taking the National Lottery Bill
through Parliament, and listened to people’s views on how to spend
the £18 billion raised for good causes.
MANCHESTER CITY GALLERY

Family interest at the
Manchester City Gallery,
funded by Renaissance, the
national scheme to
transform England’s regional
museums
AMBERLEY MUSEUM
LOTTERY GOOD CAUSES

Puppet theatre

51 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

NDPBs. Increasing numbers of our sponsored bodies now have their own sustainable development
strategies, most recently English Heritage, Sport England and the National Maritime Museum.
The groups we are working with:
• The Museums and Galleries Energy and Carbon Forum, a group of about 20 national museums,
galleries and libraries which meet regularly to discuss how to reduce carbon emissions.
• The DCMS Sustainable Development Forum, made up of representatives from all our sectors and
policy divisions.
• The DCMS staff volunteer group, the Environmental Champions, who currently feature on the
website of the Sustainable Development Commission as an example of best practice.
• The Environmental Champions are playing a major role in the refurbishment of our headquarters
building, which will begin in April 2006. Attention is being paid to sustainability principles, both in
the materials used and the methods employed. DCMS already uses 100 per cent renewable energy,
as does our agency The Royal Parks, and we are taking this opportunity to build in as many energy
efficiency measures as possible.
We are further strengthening our commitment to mainstream sustainable development by
establishing a steering board to oversee progress against the targets in our action plan, published on
1 March 2006. We are also working with our sponsored bodies to introduce a sustainable
procurement strategy for adoption by all.

ROYAL PARKS

Hyde Park
GREENWICH PARK

Boys playing football in the park in front
of the Royal Observatory

52

THE ROYAL PARKS
DIANA MEMORIAL
FOUNTAIN
The Memorial re-opened in
May after the planned repairs
and restoration programme
were completed on time and
within budget. It continues to
prove very popular with visitors
and we estimate that it could
attract as many as a million
visitors in a full year.
VOLUNTEERS
The Royal Parks has also been
working to involve local
communities in its running and
development by training
volunteers. Several projects
were achieved in partnership
with Reed Elsevier; over 60
volunteers helped plant new
reed beds in St James’s Park;

60 people took part in a teambuilding day for volunteers
from the London Business
School in Richmond Park and
Bushy Park, and ‘The Big Draw’
scheme, in which children were
invited to draw aspects of
Hyde Park, attracted over 600
participants.

‘Wildlife for All’ with RSPB
came to an end. It has been
succeeded by a further three
year project ‘Wild in the Parks’
which is designed to increase
active participation in the
preservation of the natural
heritage through volunteering
programmes and public events.

ECOLOGY AND THE
ENVIRONMENT
The Royal Parks also uses its
open spaces to increase public
awareness of the natural world
and of ecological and
environmental issues. On
World Environment Day the
Parks participated in Green
Fairs in Regent’s Park and
Greenwich Park.

REGENT’S PARK SPORTING
VENUE
The new pavilion, the Hub, was
opened in April 2005 by HRH
The Prince of Wales and the
Duchess of Cornwall. It
contains a new computerised
sports booking system. The
refurbishment of sports pitches
is now complete and they will
be ready to play on once the
new turf has fully established.

During the year the Royal
Parks’ three year partnership

53 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

RESTORING BUSHY PARK
The Royal Parks has been successful in its bid for £4.5 million of Lottery funding towards Stage 2 of
its flagship project, including the restoration of the 18th century water gardens, which have been lost
to the public for decades.
ROYAL PARKS CONSTABULARY (RPC)
The Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 included measures to transfer the Royal Parks
Constabulary to the Metropolitan Police Authority. The transfer was agreed following a
recommendation by Anthony Speed CBE, QPM, DL to integrate the policing of the Royal Parks with
the policing of London. It is planned that the RPC will be abolished in 2006.

WORKING WITH THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
We play an increasingly important role in the Government’s international agenda. We have been
developing our own international strategy in the context of the Government’s international strategy
which the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has been reviewing. Another area of
engagement has been our role in Lord Carter’s review of public diplomacy, which included the
involvement of several of our sectors.
As we implement our own strategy we will be ensuring that we work closely with our NDPBs to
target our activity in relation to our agreed goals: excellence, opportunity, economy, diversity and
sustainability. These will ensure that we also respond to wider government concerns including the
revised definition of public diplomacy, in order to maximise the contribution of culture in support of
the Government’s international strategic priorities. Our new cultural initiative, the UK-China:

Connections through Culture programme is already demonstrating how we can increase our impact
by coordinating activity. Created with the FCO and the British Council, this programme will develop
sustainable links between cultural organisations in the UK and China over the next four years.
We achieved many important goals when the UK held the Presidency of the EU. Political agreement
was reached on several EU funding programmes, a new action plan for the digitisation of cultural
heritage was agreed, and good progress was made on an initiative to facilitate the mobility of
museum objects and collections throughout the Community.
We jointly hosted a major European Audiovisual Conference with the European Commission in
Liverpool. It facilitated expert discussion of the revision of the ‘Television Without Frontiers’ Directive.
Our key priority for the next year will be to influence the debate within the EU, towards a Directive
which allows the traditional broadcasting and new media industries to flourish and adheres to ‘better
regulation’ principles.
We led the Government’s delegation on the negotiations in Paris on UNESCO’s Cultural Diversity
Convention. As the climax coincided with the UK Presidency of the EU, we were able to lead the
25 EU Member States in the negotiations, ensuring the adoption of the Convention.
The Gambling Act 2005 will for the first time introduce a robust and tailored regulatory regime for
remote gambling in Great Britain. However, we recognise that remote gambling is a global issue and
requires a global response. We have announced our intention to host the first ever international
Government summit on remote gambling later in 2006. We want to use the summit to initiate
discussions about developing international minimum standards in areas such as the protection of
children and vulnerable people, the prevention of criminal infiltration, and responsible advertising.

54

ZAMBIA

Go Sisters football
tournament, in Zambia, as
part of the Next Step: Sport
for Development Conference,
to raise AIDS awareness
SPORT

Cricket in Regent’s Park

Our work with the EU is an
important strand of our
international strategy. We will
seek to maintain the added
momentum gained during our
Presidency, maximising the
value of the new programmes
which will be finalised in the
coming year.
DRUG FREE SPORT
In May 2005, the UK’s national
anti-doping organisation, UK
Sport launched its Manifesto
for Drug Free Sport and its new
anti-doping education
programme ‘100% Me’. It is the
first national programme to be
endorsed by the World AntiDoping Agency (WADA).
UK Sport is committed to
carrying out 7,000 doping tests
this year, with a planned
increase to 7,500 in 2006-07.

As the holder of the EU
Presidency and one of the EU
representatives on the WADA
Foundation Board, DCMS took
the lead in driving forward
international drug-free sport
topics:

The UK Government also looks
forward to ratifying the
International Convention against
doping in sport shortly.

• Securing a consensus of
opinion amongst EU Member
States in support of the
International Convention
against Doping in Sport.
• The development of a universal
framework for appointing
governmental representatives
to the WADA Foundation Board.
• A review of the WADA
Prohibited List of Substances
and Methods.

55 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

ECONOMY
The UK leads the world in digital television and over two-thirds of UK households are
already enjoying the greater choice and improved reception of digital television.

Grampian
2010

Scottish
2010
Border
2008

Tyne
Tees
2012

Ulster
2012

Granada
2009

Wales
2009

Yorkshire
2011

Anglia
2011

Central
2011
London
2012
West
2010

Westcountry
2009

56

Meridian
2012

Our Economy strategic priority seeks to support the Government’s central economic objective of
achieving high and stable levels of growth and employment. To support this we have created an
Economic Impact Unit, which is currently working on:
• The Creative Economy programme - which aims to support the innovation, growth and productivity
of the creative industries, bringing coherence to those public projects which support them.
• Strengthening our engagement with cross-Government economic programmes. The principal
exercise is the new Better Regulation Programme, which will be overseen by a task group.
• Improving our intelligence and planned response to legislative and other developments in the
economic environments for our sectors, including those originating in national, EU and
international arenas. This includes the Services Directive, the Working Time Directive, the
Compensation Bill and the Working Families legislation.
• Leading on a limited number of individual priority projects relevant to economic impact. An
example is the new initiative on ticket touting, which affects economic activity in our sectors.
To ensure full co-ordination of all our economic work, we have expanded the Economy Board to
include representatives from Arts, Sport and other relevant divisions. This will allow us to develop
the economic impact of all the Department’s activities.

DIGITAL TV

Digital TV day – Idea Store,
Whitechapel

BROADCASTING
DIGITAL TV SWITCHOVER
Seventy per cent of UK homes
now receive and enjoy digital
television. But until we turn off
the analogue signals, we will
not be able to increase the
coverage of digital terrestrial
much beyond 73 per cent.
Only full switchover will allow
everyone who currently
receives analogue TV to enjoy
digital television.
In September 2005, the
Secretary of State announced
that switchover will take place
from 2008, starting with the
Borders region and will be
completed by 2012. Switchover
will be implemented by Digital
UK, a consortium of the public
service broadcasters and

multiplex operators; involving
the supply chain and other
stakeholders.
DCMS and the BBC carried out
a technical trial of Digital
Switchover in the Welsh villages
of Ferryside and Llansteffan.
The digital signal was switched
on following agreement with
the communities, and four
months later the analogue
signal was switched off. The
trial has helped us to
understand the technical and
consumer issues associated
with the switchover process.

with a significant disability
make the switch, which will be
funded by the BBC. DCMS and
the BBC have set up a trial in
Bolton to assess the level of
assistance to people aged over
75 and those with a significant
disability. We are working with
charities and have reconveyed
the Consumer Experts Group.
In March, the Group produced
its first report on usability
specifications for digital
equipment used to help the
scheme.

DCMS has championed the
need for an assistance scheme
to help vulnerable groups to
switchover. It has announced
details of schemes to help
older people and people

57 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

LICENSING REFORM
The Licensing Act 2003, the most radical shake up of licensing laws in 40 years, came into force in
November 2005. This followed a nine month transition period during which around 190,000 premises
licences and over 300,000 licences were approved by the new licensing authorities.
The modernised licensing law, which covers the supply of alcohol and the provision of regulated
entertainment and late night refreshment, provides:
• Local communities with a greater say in licensing decisions
• Police with tough new sanctions to deal with problem premises and irresponsible licensees
• Local authorities with new responsibilities and resources to administer and enforce the new system
• Citizens with increased choice and freedom
• Responsible businesses with the opportunity to meet changing consumer demands.
It is too early to be definitive about the effect of the changes at this time. As with any major reform,
a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation programme has been put in place. But some early
benefits include:
• Better partnerships between licensing authorities, the police, environmental health and trading
standards, providing a multi-agency approach to tackling problem premises
• New powers to review licences and close premises, providing a powerful message to irresponsible
licensees
• Residents and responsible authorities have had a significant influence over the operation of tens of
thousands of premises, as conditions such as the requirement for CCTV, door staff and sound

58

management systems have
been applied to licenses
• Varied opening hours,
especially at weekends. This
has the potential to
encourage people to pace
their drinking and reduce the
number of people emptying
onto the streets at the same
time thus reducing the
number of flashpoints.
FORWARD LOOK
Changes to the licensing laws
will be monitored and evaluated
closely: we are working with
10 Scrutiny Councils to gather
information about the practical
effects of operating the new
regime, for licensing authorities
and their local partners. We are
also reviewing the statutory
guidance provided to licensing
authorities and the police,

which will be completed during
the summer.
An Independent Licensing Fees
Review Panel has been set up to
consider evidence about
whether fees need to be altered
on a national basis to recover
reasonable costs falling on
licensing authorities’ from
legitimate and efficient
administration, inspection and
enforcement under the new
licensing regime. The Panel is
due to report in the autumn.
Licensing reforms are just one
element of a wider Government
programme aimed at tackling
the problems of binge and
problem drinking. We will
continue to work closely with
the Home Office and the
Department of Health as they

drive forward the Respect
agenda, Alcohol Harm
Reduction Strategy and the
Violent Crime Reduction Bill.

GAMBLING
IMPLEMENTING THE
GAMBLING ACT 2005
The Gambling Act, passed in April
2005, modernises the regulation
of all forms of gambling and in
particular introduces a regulatory
regime for online gambling. It
will come fully into force in
autumn 2007. It places
protection of the consumer,
children and the vulnerable at
the heart of a new, tough
regulatory regime, while allowing
a socially responsible industry to
develop opportunities afforded
by new technology.

The new reforms deliver tough new rules to deal with problem
premises and irresponsible licensees, whilst increasing choice and
freedom for the public.

SEASIDE PUB
NORTH YORKSHIRE

Riverfront Pub

59 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

We have:
• Established the new Gambling Commission, which was launched in October 2005.
• Set up the Casino Advisory Panel, which will advise the Secretary of State on the locations for the 17
new casinos (one regional, eight large, eight small) allowed by the Act. It is due to report at the end of
2006.
• Embarked on a series of consultations with the Gambling Commission on the secondary legislation,
licensing regimes and codes of practice needed to bring the Act into force.
• Worked closely with local authorities, to prepare them to take on their new responsibility for licensing
gambling premises under the Act; with industry organisations and representatives; with faith groups, noncommercial stakeholders, researchers and academics, and those involved in preventing and treating
problem gambling.
REGULATING THE NATIONAL LOTTERY
In November 2005 the National Lottery Commission launched the competition for the next lottery
licence with the publication of its Statement of Main Principles. This set out its approach to the
organisation of the bidding process. It aims to award the new licence in May 2007, allowing a
20 month transition period before the start of the next licence period in February 2009.
FUTURE OF THE TOTE AND HORSERACE BETTING LEVY
Work continues with the racing industry to address the European Commission's concerns relating to
the proposed sale of the Tote to a consortium of racing interests. In December 2005, Lord Donoghue
submitted his proposals for the future funding of racing after the planned abolition of the levy in
2009. The Government is currently considering its response to his recommendations.

TOURISM
OVERVIEW
Tourism is our fifth biggest industry, generating £75 billion a year and employing 1.4 million people.
We are committed with our partners to making it a £100 billion a year industry by 2010.2
MEETING THE PRODUCTIVITY CHALLENGE
We have made important progress on our growth and productivity priorities, focussing on three
priorities during the year: skills, better regulation and the Olympics. By working with other
Departments, we have sought to improve the contribution of public policy to the competiveness of
tourism:
• Workforce skills – People1st has begun work with the industry on delivering a comprehensive Sector
Skills Agreement by the end of 2006. People1st is also engaged in key initiatives such as Train to
Gain and Skills Academies.
• Regulation – worked with the Better Regulation Executive to ensure that outputs from the
Administration Burdens Exercise and Simplification Plan benefit the tourism sector. We have also been
working with the British Holiday Home Parks Association and the ODPM to develop improved
planning guidance for the sector.
• Sustainable tourism – worked with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the
wider industry on a set of indicators for monitoring the sustainability of the industry, providing a
benchmark for future monitoring; and on accreditation schemes for “Green” accommodation
providers, which are being piloted in the South West and the South East regions.

60

2

ONS International Passenger Survey 2005

HORSE RACING

Ascot, Berkshire

Tourism is our fifth biggest industry, generating £75 billion a year and
employing 1.4 million people. We are committed with our partners to
making it a £100 billion a year industry by 2010.
• Managed Migration – worked
with the Home Office on the
development of the new points
based system, so that our
sectors can employ migrant
labour from outside the EU,
and continue to attract
visitors from overseas.
• Real Estate Investment Trusts
(formerly Property Investment
Funds) – worked with the
British Hospitality Association
and HM Treasury to ensure
that the proposals for the
development of Real Estate
Investment Trusts did not
exclude our sector as
originally announced.
MARKETING
Nearly 30 million overseas
visitors were welcomed to
the UK last year spending
£14.3 billion, a record amount.

VisitBritain, the national tourism
promotion body, delivered new
international and domestic
marketing strategies, and was
voted as the World’s Leading
Tourist and Convention Bureau at
the 2005 World Travel Awards.

for the UK tourism industry,
where we aim to at least double
the value of inbound tourism
from China to £200 million by
2010.

Through the innovative
EnglandNet project,
Last year VisitBritain spent
holidaymakers can now access
£35.5 million on promoting
all the information they need
Britain overseas, contributing to
about a destination in England.
additional tourism expenditure of Businesses have access to a
£1.6 billion for the UK economy. potential 11 million website
It spent £13 million on domestic visits a year in the UK, which is
marketing, supporting tourism
set to rise to 20 million by the
expenditure of £145.5 million.
end of 2008.
We also invested £5 million with
the Regional Development
The new National Quality
Agencies in support of their
Accommodation Standards
strategic responsibilities for
scheme, run by the Devolved
tourism.
Administrations, the AA and
VisitBritain, was launched, with
“Approved Destination Status”
ambitious targets for increasing
with China came into effect in
the current 47 per cent coverage.
2005, unlocking a major market

61 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

We continue to support Tourism for All with its holiday care information service for people with disabilities.
INTERNATIONAL
In November, we re-joined the 145 country strong World Tourism Organisation, a United Nations
specialised agency, which will enable the UK to play a prominent role in international discourse on
tourism and development. As part of the UK’s Presidency of the EU, with the Maltese Government
we hosted the Fourth Annual European Tourism Forum, which was themed around better regulation
and competitiveness.
FORWARD LOOK
The 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games will bring enormous benefits for the visitor economy in
London and across the UK. In November, the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State met tourism
industry leaders and published the Tourism 2012 Charter. This is a firm statement of intent by the
Government and its key tourism partners, VisitBritain, VisitLondon and the Tourism Alliance, to work
in partnership and ensuring we will be ready to maximise the opportunities presented by the
Games in 2012.
The Charter commits the industry to driving up standards in Britain’s 180,000 tourism businesses,
making attractions and accommodation accessible to disabled visitors and improving the skills of
people employed in the sector. We will start with a full consultation on our strategy in the spring.
2005 also demonstrated that the visitor economy is subject to external shocks. The terrorist attacks
on London led to a downturn in visitor numbers to the capital. The Department will continue to work

with VisitBritain to ensure that our contingency planning arrangements are effective. A key element
of managing these incidents will continue to be the operation of the cross-sector Tourism Industry
Emergency Response Group.

CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
The UK creative industries are 13 sectors, including architecture, the performing arts, film, the music
industry, fashion, advertising and computer games. They make a significant contribution to the economy,
accounting for 1.9 million jobs2 showcasing British talent and enhancing people’s quality of life.
CREATIVE ECONOMY PROGRAMME
In November 2005 the Minister for the Creative Industries launched the Creative Economy
Programme, which is the first step in making Britain the world’s creative hub.
The programme is based around six key levers of productivity in the Creative Industries. These are
Education and Skills, Competition and Intellectual Property, Technology, Business Support and Access to
Finance, Diversity, Infrastructure and also a research group on Evidence and Analysis.

2
DCMS statistical bulletin ‘Creative Industries
Economic Estimates’, August 2004

62

We have formed groups for each
of these levers mostly from
DCMS bodies, other
Government Departments and
RDAs. In parallel to this we have
planned a series of industry
meetings and sector summits to
ensure that the Creative
Industries are able to influence
the work of the Programme.

SALFORD QUAYS

The Lowry centre and
footbridge illuminated
at night
GALLERY

Portraits by David Hockney
at the Salts Mill Gallery
Saltaire, West Yorkshire
FASHION

Royal College of Art, fashion
show held at the V&A

In addition the Programme is
being overseen by a
public/private steering group
consisting of Government
Ministers, the Chairs of each of
the working groups and high
flying individuals from the
Creative Industries.
We hope that the Programme
will produce interim conclusions
by the summer leading to full
recommendations in the autumn.

NEW SECTORS
In the Machinery of Government
changes in June 2005, DCMS
took on joint responsibility
with DTI for sponsorship of the
Design Council and the
advertising, computer games
and publishing industries.
DCMS also took on full
responsibility for the designer
fashion industry and the arts
and antiques markets.
We are working closely with
DTI to add value to the
Government’s overall
sponsorship of these sectors.
Ministers have already engaged
in a number of events,
including a games industry
workshop organised with the
Regional Development Agencies,
Devolved Administrations, central
Government and trade
associations.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
A strong and fair intellectual
property regime is fundamental
to a thriving, creative economy.
A key challenge is the threat of
piracy, counterfeit goods and
illegal file sharing.
The Creative Industries Forum
on Intellectual Property (IP),
set up by DCMS, DTI and the
Patent Office, examined how
to deal with these threats and
presented the Government with
a series of recommendations.
Work has been moving forward
on a range of initiatives that
support the Forum’s focus:
• Implementing the Patent
Office’s National IP Crime
Strategy which aims to deliver
better-targeted enforcement
action.

63 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

• Creating a new creative industries focus group under the IP Crime Group to ensure issues of
concern can be fed directly into the IP Crime Strategy.
• From April 2006, in England and Wales, all asset recovery agencies, including the Trading Standards
Service, will be able to get back 50 per cent of the assets they recover under the Proceeds of Crime
Act from action related to the confiscation of pirated goods.
Following a commitment in the 2005 Manifesto to “modernise copyright and other forms of
intellectual property so that they are appropriate for the digital age”, the Chancellor of the Exchequer
announced that a review under Andrew Gowers would report in Autumn 2006 to the Chancellor, and
the Secretaries of State for Trade and Industry and Culture, Media and Sport.
FILM
2005 saw a strong performance from UK feature film production, with 37 films produced at a value
of £160 million (36 per cent higher than 2004), including Anthony Minghella’s Breaking and Entering
and Geoffrey Sax’s Stormbreaker 3. The UK and Ireland box office bucked the worldwide downturn to
record a 1 per cent rise in revenue to £840 million, with home grown films accounting for 34 per cent of
the total (the highest figure in 10 years) and making up eight of the top 20 highest grossing films 4.
We have worked in partnership with our strategic film advisor, the UK Film Council, to ensure that
British film production continues to be supported and encouraged. A major milestone was the
Chancellor’s announcement of the new tax incentives aimed to more effectively target relief at
genuine film production companies.

We have also continued to look at how we can help UK film makers work with their counterparts
abroad and strengthen the UK as the centre of international film making. Negotiations have begun on
new co-production agreements with China, Jamaica, Morocco and South Africa; and in December the
Secretary of State signed the main body of the UK-India agreement.
The new tax relief (which applies to expenditure in the UK) will mean that, on low budget films
(with production budgets up to £20 million), the tax credit level will be 20 per cent; on higher budget
films (with production budgets of £20 million and above), the tax credit level will be 16 per cent. In
addition, the minimum UK expenditure threshold will be lowered from the proposed 40 per cent to
25 per cent allowing more films to qualify.
SUPPORTING THE MUSIC INDUSTRY
As sponsors of the music industry, we act as its advocate within Government. Our role is to ensure
that appropriate weight is given to the industry’s interests in policies, legislation and programmes,
and we work closely with a broad range of bodies to achieve this.
The industry is a big player in the national economy, contributing nearly £5 billion annually and
employing 130,000 people. UK annual retail spending on recorded music exceeds £2 billion.
2005 was the best year in history for the “artist album”, sales of which in the UK totalled nearly
160 million, up 1.4 per cent on 2004. These successes were mirrored by digital sales with 26.4 million
downloads, worth £620 million up by 357 per cent on 2004.

3

UK Film Council film production statistics 2005
Nielsen EDI; Box Office gross = cumulative
total up to 8 January 2006

4

64

FILM

Vera Drake
MUSIC

Live jazz performance

2005 saw a very strong performance from UK feature film production, with 37 films
produced at a value of £160 million – 36 per cent higher than 2004.

SUPPORTING LIVE MUSIC
The Live Music Forum continues
to take forward our commitment
to monitor the impact of the
Licensing Act on live music; in
addition to raising the profile
of live music and its cultural
and economic importance.
In 2005 the Forum built on its
earlier work to create more
rehearsal and performance
spaces for live music and with
music industry partners, the
Welsh Development Agency
and Wrexham Council, has
opened the first performance
and rehearsal space in Wales.
The Forum will be making its
final recommendations to the
Government in autumn 2006.

ACCESS TO FINANCE FOR
MUSIC’S SMALL BUSINESSES
We have recently completed a
study into the financial
problems faced by Small and
Medium Sized Enterprises
(SMEs) in the music industry.
The study looked to identify
problems faced by SMEs when
starting up, as well as barriers
to growth. It builds on the
anecdotal evidence outlined in
the Department’s earlier study
Banking on a Hit, suggesting
that that the majority of the
SMEs in the music industry
experience difficulties in
accessing finance to fund startup or second stage growth. The
results will be published shortly.

SKILLS AND EDUCATION
Although only licensed in June,
Creative and Cultural Skills (the
Sector Skills Council for
advertising, crafts, cultural
heritage, design, music,
performing, literary and visual
arts) has made significant
progress in developing plans for
a new Creative Apprenticeship
framework.

65 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

DELIVERY
This section covers the efficiency review, our internal change management programme
and the work we are doing with our sponsored bodies.

66

EFFICIENCY REVIEW
TARGETS AND PROGRESS TO DATE
This table illustrates the Department’s target to deliver £262 million of efficiency gains by 2007-08.
DCMS EFFICIENCY FORECASTS, £MILLIONS
SECTOR

Internal
NDPBs
Local Authorities
TOTAL GAINS

GAINS
(as of 30-9-05)

FORECASTS
2005-06

FORECASTS
2006-07

FORECASTS
2007-08

0
34
28
62

0
36
49
87

1
76
98
174

2
113
146
262

As agreed with HM Treasury and the Office for Government Commerce, data on efficiency gains are
collected every six months from our NDPBs. The latest data that we hold is from September 2005.
No cashable gains have been reported to December 2005 but gains are subject to further
verification. It is predicted that approximately 80 per cent of NDPBs’, and 70 per cent of local
authorities’ total efficiency gains will be cashable.
BRISTOL SCIENCE CENTRE

Children learning through
interactive fibre-optic exhibit

NDPBs’ and local authorities’ efficiency plans have been carefully scrutinised to ensure that
proposed measures represent genuine efficiencies and not cuts in services. Similarly, different
bodies’ outputs (including productivity or quality measures) are also monitored to ensure that

services are not being cut,
as a result of the efficiency
programme. Various measures
will be used to ensure this,
including progress towards
meeting Public Service
Agreement (PSA) targets,
customer satisfaction surveys
and Key Performance Indicators.

and to relocate 600 posts in its
NDPBs outside London and the
South East by 2010. Headcount
reductions will take place as
part of the natural turnover of
staff, without the need for
redundancies. As at December
2005, the headcount figure had
reduced by 1 compared to the
baseline. This is in line with the
Full details, including auditing
trajectory set out in the
arrangements, are set out in the Department’s Efficiency Technical
Department’s Efficiency
Note which forecast a reduction
Technical Note, available at:
of 3 posts by March 2006.
www.culture.gov.uk
The relocation project has plans
for over 900 posts to be moved
HEADCOUNT AND
from London and the South
RELOCATION
East by 2010. Relocation plans
Aside from the new service of
supporting the 2012 Olympics, announced so far are for 560
DCMS has a target to reduce its posts from the Big Lottery Fund
own workforce by approximately and the Gambling Commission
by the end of 2007. It is
5 per cent (27 posts) by 2008,

planned that 300 posts in the
Big Lottery Fund will be
relocated to Birmingham and
Newcastle, and 260 posts in the
Gambling Commission will be
relocated to Birmingham. This is
in line with the trajectory set
out in the Department’s
Efficiency Technical Note. To
date 16 posts have been
relocated outside London and
the South East.
EFFICIENCY INITIATIVES
Internal savings are being
generated through improving
budget alignment with business
planning and identifying more
efficient ways of working. This
includes greater use of project
management and centralising the
Department’s correspondence
handling systems.

67 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

NDPBs have identified a variety of projects to improve their efficiency, including:
• Improving procurement practices
• Combining back office functions between institutions
• IT and HR reform
• Embedding efficiency within their Funding Agreements.
Local authorities have similarly identified projects to improve efficiency over the last year. Around
half of authorities anticipated making efficiency gains in culture and sport, and one fifth expected to
improve the efficiency of their libraries.

DCMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT
Changes initiated under the Touchstone Change Management Programme have resulted in DCMS
becoming a more project-based organisation. The emphasis now is to maintain momentum and
ensure continuous improvement is built into what we do.
This is being achieved through a continuing programme of modernisation to ensure strategic
coherence. Progress this year included the establishment of a new Public Bodies Division to act as a
focal point for improving the performance of NDPBs; the establishment of a Central Information and
Briefing Unit to centralise correspondence with external contacts; launch of the Taking Part survey;
and agreement of revised Funding Agreements with our NDPBs.

IMPROVING THE WAY WE OPERATE
We expect senior managers in DCMS to demonstrate their commitment to a project-based approach
as practitioners and in enabling and encouraging their staff to do the same. Nearly three quarters of
senior staff have been trained as Gateway reviewers, and the lessons they learn from reviews they
undertake help them to look afresh at their own project portfolios. We are active in updating the
project management training modules available to staff, both as individuals and members of project
teams. This has enabled us to provide focused support as staff project skills have increased.
We continue to monitor progress through the quarterly presentation of a Balanced Scorecard to the
Board, which includes:
• PSA and Efficiency Review Delivery: we use the traffic light model for assessment of progress on our
PSA and Efficiency Review targets.
• Managing Staff: we present statistics on sick days, vacancies, the embedding of project working in
the organisation and diversity.
• Efficiency and Control: resource management accounts and risk registers are analysed, and pressures
identified, then presented for resolution of issues.
• Dealing with the public: a range of statistics designed to give an indication as to how we are
performing, including: the number of letters and Freedom of Information requests from the public,
MPs and Peers and the number of Parliamentary Questions answered on time and payment of
agreed invoices within 30 days of receipt.

68

SUPPORTING NDPB REFORMS
We have continued working
with our NDPBs on initiatives
to improve effectiveness:
• The new three-year funding
agreements between DCMS
and our NDPBs have defined
the full public value that our
expenditure should deliver, and
by setting customer satisfaction
targets for our bodies we have
ensured that quality of service
should continue to improve.

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND, SOUTH WEST

Silver bangles made by artist
Stephanie Johnson

where further improvements
were needed. These included:
the Arts Council’s alignment
with Government priorities; its
ability to speak with authority
on behalf of the arts sector; its
collection and use of evidence;
and clarity around the role and
focus of the Arts Council
National Office. A detailed
action plan was drawn up at
the time of publication and is
now being implemented. Plans
are underway to use the 60th
birthday of the Arts Council
this summer as a way of
marking this new chapter in
the organisation’s history.

• A Peer Review of Arts Council
England was undertaken in
summer 2005 and published
last December. The final report
of the Review team noted the • Extensive research has been
successes that the Arts Council carried out into best practice
had achieved in managing
in governance, which will lead
increased investment in the
to new guidance and support
arts since 1997, but noted that for NDPB boards.
there were a number of areas

CULTURAL LEADERSHIP FUND
The Chancellor announced a
new £12 million Cultural
Leadership Fund, available from
2006-07 to benefit leadership in
the wider cultural sector. In July
2005 a “Call for Ideas” was
launched by Arts Council
England and a core group of
stakeholders. Following
consideration of responses to
the document, the group has
developed proposals around key
themes. The programme will be
launched in spring 2006.

69 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

LONDON 2012 OLYMPIC
AND PARALYMPIC GAMES
6 July 2005 was a momentous
day for British sport and a
proud day for our country.
The International Olympic
Committee’s (IOC) decision to
award the 2012 Olympic
Games and Paralympic Games
to London was a tremendous
honour and achievement.
London’s success was also a
wonderful tribute to the skill
and dedication of all those
involved in our bid.
We now have a magnificent
opportunity to stage the
greatest show on earth, but we
need the 2012 Games to do so
much more than simply deliver
29 days of world-class sport. We
have been presented with a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity
to transform the UK’s sporting,
cultural and social landscape.

70

The passion and commitment
that we channelled into the bid
is now carrying through to
delivering what will be the
greatest Games ever. We have
already made remarkable
progress. Just eight days after
the IOC’s announcement, the
London Olympic Games and
Paralympic Games Bill was
introduced to Parliament. The
Bill received Royal Assent in
March 2006. Twenty days after
the IOC’s announcement, the
first Lottery scratchcards were
launched to help fund the
Games. The first edition of the
‘Go for Gold’ scratchcard sold
faster than any other new
£1 scratchcard launched by
Camelot. At the end of March
we had exceeded the 2005-06
income target.

Work has already begun on the
Olympic Park site and a team
has been chosen to design the
Park. Key appointments have
also been made at the Olympic
Delivery Authority (ODA) and
London Organising Committee
for the Olympic Games
(LOCOG).
The British people’s support
and enthusiasm, displayed so
vividly during the bidding
phase, is as strong as ever. In
the first six days after the IOC’s
announcement, 17,000 people
registered an interest in
volunteering for the Games. By
the beginning of 2006, that
number had risen to a
remarkable 80,000.
We have also continued to
build on the strong support
that British businesses provided

during the bidding phase. For instance, DCMS hosted a hugely successful 2012 Business Summit in
January 2006. A further conference will be held in Leeds in July 2006 to discuss how best to deliver
national and regional economic gains from the 2012 Games.
A Nations and Regions Group has been established to ensure the whole of the UK is engaged with
and benefits from the Games in 2012. Each nation and region will set up a national or regional
working group, which will draw together all those who have a role to play. The progress we have
already made was praised by the IOC when they visited London in November 2005.
Delivering the Games will be a great responsibility and it is vital that we press ahead at full speed.
Over the coming year, DCMS, as lead Government Department for the 2012 Games, will continue
to work closely with other Government departments and relevant bodies in the nations and regions
to ensure that the Games leave a lasting legacy and create maximum social, economic, sporting
and environmental benefits for London and the UK as a whole.

LONDON 2012

Victory celebrations
CELEBRATING OUR WINNING BID
VELODROME

71 CHAPTER ONE, PART ONE

BBC CHARTER REVIEW
We are now in the final stage of the review of the BBC’s Royal Charter, which ends
on 31 December 2006. The White Paper, A public service for all: the BBC in the
digital age was published on 14 March 2006 alongside a draft version of the Royal
Charter and Agreement.
The White Paper builds on the Green Paper, A strong BBC, independent of
Government, which was published on 2 March 2005, as well as the findings of our
extensive public consultations and programmes of research.

72

The Green Paper outlined a number of key conclusions that the BBC would remain strong and
independent, setting world class standards across a wide range of programmes; and will continue to
be established by a 10 year Royal Charter and funded by the licence fee.
In order for the BBC to remain strong there are changes that must be made. The BBC will have a
clearer, tighter remit; we will replace the Board of Governors with a new, more transparent BBC
Trust that will be directly accountable to licence fee payers; and the responsibility for day-to-day
management and delivery of the BBC’s services will be delegated to the Executive Board. The BBC
will also help drive the process of digital switchover. The detailed role and responsibilities of the
BBC Trust and the Executive Board will be set out in the 10 year Royal Charter and Agreement.

BBC PROGRAMMES

Who do you think you are?

We also commissioned two pieces of research on the proposals in the Green Paper. The first report
was published in March 2005 and consisted of focus groups discussing the main questions outlined
in the Paper. The second project looked at two specific areas of the Paper: Governance and
Accountability and Collection and Enforcement of the Licence Fee. Both of these reports were carried
out to support and test the results of the consultation, and to make sure we reflected the views of
all sections of the population. Both of these reports are available at www.bbccharterreview.org.uk.
All this evidence has been analysed and used to finalise the policy in the White Paper. The key
outcome of the Charter Review process has been to establish a framework in which the BBC’s role
is defined more clearly than ever. It will ensure that the Corporation is fit for purpose, able to
respond to the demands of changing technology and provide a framework that puts public purpose,
performance and accountability at its centre, whilst defining a new relationship between the BBC
and the rest of the market.

Serious Amazon
Coast

PART TWO
The White Paper is published at www.bbccharterreview.org.uk. The draft Charter and Agreement
are also available, which translate the decisions in the White Paper into legal provisions. The
consultation on the draft Charter and Agreement enabled the public and interested organisations
to give their views on how the policy was set out. The final Royal Charter and Agreement will be
published later this year.

73 CHAPTER ONE, PART TWO

PERFORMANCE AGAINST
OUR PUBLIC SERVICE
AGREEMENT TARGETS
Public Service Agreements (PSAs) set out each Department's aim, objectives and
key outcome-based targets. They are agreed with HM Treasury and form an
integral part of the spending plans set out in Spending Reviews. At each Spending
Review since their introduction in 1998, PSAs have been refined and developed in
order that Departments continue to focus on the priorities that the Government
is committed to deliver.
This section of the report sets out progress towards our PSA targets set in the
Spending Reviews (SRs) 2002 and 2004.

74

MUSEUMS

An ammonite fossil in the
Lewes Castle Museum,
East Sussex

PERFORMANCE INFORMATION
For each of our PSA targets there is at least one performance indicator against which progress is
monitored. Associated with each indicator is one or more project(s) that will drive the attainment
of that particular indicator. Those projects are brought together under a programme, which coordinates and drives the delivery of the overall target. Baselines and data analysis methodologies
are detailed in the Departmental Technical Notes available on our website at www.culture.gov.uk.

PROGRESS WE HAVE MADE AGAINST SR2002 (2003-06)
PSA TARGETS
PSA 1 TARGET
Enhance the take-up of sporting opportunities by 5-16 year olds by increasing
the percentage of school children who spend a minimum of two hours each
week on high quality PE and school sport within and beyond the curriculum
from 25 per cent in 2002 to 75 per cent by 2006 (Joint target with DfES)

PART THREE
PE AND SCHOOL
SPORT
INDICATOR
Percentage of 5-16-year olds in
schools who spend a minimum
of two hours each week during
term time on high quality PE
and sport within and beyond
the National Curriculum.
(Source: Annual Audit of School
Sport Partnerships.)

School Sport and Club Links
(PESSCL) strategy. It is being
delivered through an extensive
network of delivery agents and
partnerships. Those
programmes are:

• Specialist Sports Colleges
• School Sports Partnerships
• Gifted & Talented
• QCA PE & School Sport
Investigation
• Step into Sport
Proportion of lessons in which
• Professional Development
the quality of teaching is
assessed by Office for Standards • Club Links
in Education (Ofsted) as good
• Swimming
or better.
• Sporting Playgrounds
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
This is a project of nine linked
programmes, collectively
delivering the national PE,

Linked work on coaching also
supports delivery and forms
part of the PSA 2 programme.

PROGRESS REPORT
Ahead
• Evidence of Partnerships’
desired impact on schools.
• Network of School Sport
Partnerships now at 411.
Target was 400 by 2006
covering 80 per cent of
maintained schools (5 per cent
above target).
• Refocusing action to support
target groups - girls, ethnic
minorities, pupils from
deprived backgrounds and Key
Stage 4 pupils to sustain and
increase participation.
• Target trajectories in place and
reviewed after 2005 survey.
• Partnerships have set 2006
targets for key outcomes.

75 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
Overall, 69 per cent of pupils in partnership schools participate in at least two hours of high quality
PE and school sport in a typical week – up seven percentage points from the 2003/04 survey. The
ambition by 2010 is to offer all children at least four hours of sport every week. This should comprise
at least two hours of PE within the curriculum and an additional two to three hours of sport beyond
the school day (delivered by a range of school, community and club providers).
A national network of sports colleges and school sport partnerships is supporting delivery of this
target. At present there are 381 designated specialist sports colleges, including ten academies with a
sports focus and 80 per cent of schools are now within one of the 411 operational partnerships.
The ‘Autumn Performance Report 2005’ incorrectly stated the percentage of PE teaching judged by
Ofsted to be good or better. It should have stated that Ofsted judged that in 2003/04, the quality of
teaching was good or better in 80 per cent (not 76 per cent) of secondary schools and 60 per cent
(not 62 per cent) of primary schools.
Source of Data: The 2004-05 School Sport Survey and 2003/04 Ofsted reports PE subject reports.

76

PSA 2 TARGET
Increase significantly take-up of cultural and sporting opportunities by new
users aged 20 and above from priority groups.
monitored through the Funding • DCMS is working with ACE to
put in place new reporting
Agreement with DCMS. ACE is
procedures for the
working
through
three
main
INDICATOR
programmes being funded by
funding
channels:
regularly-funded
Increase attendance from under
ACE for the SR2004 target.
organisations
(RFOs),
grants
for
represented groups in arts events.
the arts (open application funds) • Evidence suggests individual
Targets: Increase attendance by and flexible funds (which are not
programme elements are
3 per cent and participation by open to application).
impacting on priority groups
2 per cent.
but at a slower rate then
PROGRESS
expected.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Slippage
The package of interventions
• Based on the latest survey
underpinning this objective is
information, only one of the
being delivered by Arts Council
six targets is currently on target.
England (ACE), managed and

THE ARTS

ANGEL OF THE NORTH

Sculpture by
Antony Gormley

ARTS LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
Attended at least two events
Baseline Target
Latest
Out-turn

Disabled people
29% (2001)
(limiting longstanding illness)
Socially excluded
23% (2001)
(Social classes C2DE)
Black and ethnic minority 32% (2002)

Participated in at least two events
Baseline Target
Latest
Out-turn

32%

26%

12% (2001)

14%

12%

26%

26%

10% (2001)

12%

9%

35%

30%

15% (2002)

17%

11%

Data are collected from the Office for National Statistics Omnibus Survey

NATIONAL
MUSEUMS AND
GALLERIES

economic groups C2, D and E
to DCMS-sponsored national
museums and galleries.

INDICATOR
Increase by 8 per cent by
2005-06 adult visitors in socio-

PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The maintenance of free access
is key to increasing admissions
from these groups. The Funding

Agreements for 2003-06 set
targets for each museum to
undertake specific activities
depending on its own
circumstances.
PROGRESS
Met

LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
2002-03 Baseline
5,362,167

Target
5,791,140 (8%)

2004-05 out-turn
6,820,939 (27%)

Performance data collected from DCMS-sponsored museums and galleries.

77 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

REGIONAL
MUSEUMS
INDICATOR
Attract 500,000 visits to
regional museums by new users
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
£60 million was allocated over
the period of the Spending
Review for building the capacity
of groups of ‘hub’ museums in
the nine regions, to enable them
to extend their reach to underrepresented groups and step up
their educational activities. The
funds were administered by the
Museums Libraries and Archives

Council under a framework
agreed with DCMS. Development
is in two phases, with the three
Phase 1 hubs receiving 70 per
cent of the SR2002 funds.
PROGRESS
Met
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
(Project started from a zero
base).
2004-06: New users for the first
two years of the target have been
3,086,283, of which 1,263,403
were from priority groups.
Performance data provided by the Museums,
Libraries and Archives Council

FLAMEWORKS

Artist-led workspace for artists
in Devon and Cornwall

SPORT
INDICATOR
Sports Coaching
• National Coaching Certificate
in 20 sports by 2006.
• 45 Coach Development
Officers by 2005.
• 3,000 Community Sports
Coaches by 2006.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
This project aims to create a
step change in the recruitment,
education, employment and
deployment of coaches working
in England and elsewhere in the
UK. It will seek to transform
coach education, professionalise
and diversify the coaching
workforce and open up access
to enable many more people to
benefit from coaching.

78

PROGRESS
On course
• Trajectories in place and being
kept under review.
• 2005-06 research in progress.
• Five sports to deliver the new
certificate to coaches in early
2006 with a total of 21 sports
by the end of 2006.
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
February 2006: Five sports are
now approved to deliver UKCC,
45 Coach Development
Officers operational and
1,761 Community Sports
Coaches in place.
Performance data provided by Sport England
and sports coach UK

HISTORIC
ENVIRONMENT
INDICATOR
Attract 100,000 visits by new users
from minority and socially deprived
groups to the historic environment
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
This project is producing a step
change in the way the sector
manages engagement with the
historic environment, including a
more inclusive approach to site
interpretation and the development
of offers, which appeal to different
sections of the community.
PROGRESS
Met
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA (The
project started from a zero base)
2004-05 out-turn: 323,478 visits by
new users from minority and socially
deprived groups.
Performance data provided by English Heritage

PSA 3 TARGET
Improve the productivity of the tourism, creative and leisure industries
DCMS seeks to support this objective at a microeconomic level, with key projects designed to
impact on its sponsored industries. These take two forms: research aimed at understanding drivers
of performance in the industries; and policies informed by research and other evidence.
The impact of these projects will be measured and assessed through analysis of the contribution
the tourism and leisure and creative industries make to UK productivity. This will be a long term
project. The base year for the data on productivity performance is 2002.
The performance of each of the projects supporting the PSA targets and the latest productivity date
is reported overleaf.

79 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

GAMBLING ACT
2005

COMMUNICATIONS LICENSING ACT
ACT 2003
2003

INDICATOR
This legislation will modernise
the regulation of all forms of
gambling while providing
greater protection for children
and vulnerable people. It will be
brought into force in 2007, once
the new national regulator, the
Gambling Commission, and all
local licensing authorities have
completed the consultations
and other preparatory work
they will need to undertake.

INDICATOR
The Act is a major reform of
regulation in the communications
sector and provides a regulatory
framework that can respond to
the market as it changes.
PROGRESS
Met
Act came into force
29 December 2003.

INDICATOR
This legislation reformed and
streamlined archaic licensing laws,
strengthening competition and
increasing choice and flexibility
for consumers while providing
a greater degree of local and
appropriate regulation and
minimising harmful practices.
PROGRESS
Met
Act came into force on
24 November 2005.

PROGRESS
Met
• The Act was given Royal Assent
on 7 April 2005
• Target date for full
implementation September
2007

THE DIGITAL
TELEVISION
ACTION PLAN

TOURISM
MARKETING

INDICATOR
There is a direct link between
INDICATOR
promotional work to increase
The purpose of the Digital
Television Action Plan was to set visitor spend and increased
productivity. The impact first of
out for Ministers the options on
Foot-and-Mouth Disease and
switchover from analogue to
digital television. The final report then of 9/11 led to a significant
of the Action Plan has now been reduction in overseas visitors and
produced and the Plan is replaced spending. The domestic tourism
market also declined, although in
with a Programme for the
this instance it was more
implementation of switchover.
resilient. These events
highlighted the particular
PROGRESS
fragility of the visitor economy
Met
to external shocks.
• The Digital Television Action
Plan, issued in 2001
Two key projects were devised
• Report on Digital Television Project
to deliver the required reforms:
published on 23 March 2005
• The reform of the tourism
• Government commitment to
support infrastructure – see
complete switchover in 2012
PSA 4 below;
(commencing in 2008)

80

• Establishment of a renewed
focus on professional
marketing within the new
VisitBritain.
PROGRESS
Met
• Domestic marketing plan
prepared September 2003
• 2003-04 30:1 return on
investment achieved
• 2004-05 initial figures indicate
29:1 investment achieved

LATEST PRODUCTIVITY OUT-TURN DATA
PROGRESS
Slippage
Our PSA target requires productivity improvements above the service sector as a whole. From figure
1, below, it is clear that while productivity in the Creative Industries and all service sectors improved
at broadly the same rate, productivity in the tourism related and other leisure industries fell. Table 1,
below, sets out the figures in more detail.
1. OVERVIEW
Figure 1 – Indices of real change in productivity
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
1998
Tourism related
and other leisures

1999

2000
Creative industries

2001
Whole economy

2002

2003

Service sector

Table 1: Annual and average percentage productivity changes from 1998 onwards5
Sector

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Average
1998-2003

Creative Industries (excl design and craft)
Tourism-related & other leisure
All services
Whole economy

3.4%
3.0%
0.9%
1.6%

3.7%
4.3%
2.5%
3.1%

-3.3%
3.1%
1.4%
1.3%

-0.9%
3.2%
1.0%
0.9%

3.1%
-2.4%
3.3%
3.9%

1.2%
2.2%
1.8%
2.2%

Despite the successful conclusion of a number of our projects productivity in the tourism sector has
fallen. Productivity is measured as gross value added (GVA) divided by total employment (see
Technical Note for more detail on definitions and methodology). The fall in tourism productivity is
driven by a 2 per cent increase in employment while GVA has remained broadly constant.
There may be two potential causes for these trends. The first is a change in the composition of
foreign visitors. The second may be related to the measure of employment
• The average expenditure per inbound visitor fell by 1 per cent in 2003 potentially causing a
reduction in income generated per employee.
• Employment is measured as the total number employed regardless of the number of hours they
work. It does not, therefore, take account of switching between full and part-time employment. It
is possible that the tourism sector has shifted towards more part time and flexible working as a
result of the uncertainty caused by incidents such as 9/11, SARS and foot and mouth disease.
5
Data is collated from ONS’s
Annual Business Inquiry (ABI)

81 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

PSA 4 TARGET
To improve significantly the value for money of the Department’s sponsored
bodies, measured by a matrix of NDPB indicators.
Under this PSA, we seek to continue improving the value delivered through our sponsored bodies by:
• Implementing targeted reform programmes for specific NDPBs where a major and pressing need
has been identified;
• Better aligning NDPB activity with DCMS priorities, through new tighter funding agreements;
• Reforming the delivery of Lottery funds to ensure fairer and more cost-effective distribution to all
areas and communities throughout the UK;
• Improving our appointments function and the way in which we deal with the Boards of our NDPBs;
• Identifying generic constraints on NDPB performance with which the Department can help,
including those relating to pay and the workforce.
This is being delivered through seven related, though distinct projects. Progress against each is
presented here.

82

REFORM OF BRITISH LIBRARY
PROGRESS
Met
• 95 posts removed in 2003-04 resulting in savings of £2.7 million per year
• Further savings of 40 posts in 2004-05 with savings of an additional £1.1 million per annum
• Structural and senior staff changes made

REFORM OF BRITISH MUSEUM
PROGRESS
Met
• 160 posts removed resulting in a net loss of 127 staff. Cost savings of £6.8million per year
• Phase II of change programme to address internal restructuring issues being implemented.
This will not deliver large savings, but it will help to modernise the culture of the museum
• Severance target secured

REFORM OF SPORT ENGLAND

BRITISH MUSEUM

Glass roof detail

PROGRESS
Met
• Strategy clear, large scale reorganisation complete
• Staff reductions have created administrative savings of £40m over five years

REFORM OF
TOURISM BODIES

REFORM OF
ENGLISH HERITAGE

LOTTERY REFORM

PROGRESS
On course
PROGRESS
PROGRESS
Met
Met
• Bill received second reading in
the Lords on 6 February 2006
• VisitBritain Head Office
• Modernisation project
and is expected to continue to
structural changes and
completed March 2005
make good progress through
development of overseas hub • Restructuring of property
Parliament
offices now completed.
management function complete
• Annual savings of £1.74 million
(investment £3.1 million; savings • Main elements of reform delivered
through secondary legislation.
resulting from merger –
£0.9 million year on year).
savings redirected towards
• Regional restructuring
marketing activity
NDPB
complete, including
• Tourism now fully incorporated rationalisation of back office
MODERNISATION
into RDA Tasking Framework
functions,
STRATEGY
• Agreed DCMS/VisitBritain/
• Restructuring of archaeology
Regional Development
and historic buildings advisory PROGRESS
Agencies/local authorities/
service complete.
Met
Industry policy priorities
• Restructuring of back office
• This project has been subsumed
published in July 2004 as
functions complete (resources
into the Department’s Efficiency
Tomorrow’s Tourism Today
and IT)
Review programme and is
reported in that section of the
Annual Report.

83 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

PROGRESS WE HAVE MADE AGAINST SR2004 (2005-08)
PSA TARGETS
PSA 1 TARGET
Enhance the take-up of sporting opportunities by 5-16 year olds so that the
percentage of school children who spend a minimum of two hours each week
on high quality PE and school sport within and beyond the curriculum from
25 per cent in 2002 to 75 per cent by 2006 and to 85 per cent by 2008.

PE AND SCHOOL SPORT
INDICATOR
Percentage of 5-16-year olds in schools who spend a minimum of two hours each week during
term time on high-quality PE and sport within and beyond the National Curriculum.
An indicator for quality was finalised in October 2003 following the introduction of a new
framework for Ofsted’s inspection of schools from September 2003.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION
This is a programme of nine
linked projects, collectively
delivering the PE, School Sport
and Club Links (PESSCL)
Strategy. It is being delivered
through an extensive network of
delivery agents and partnerships.
Those programmes are:
• Specialist Sports Colleges
• School Sports Partnerships
• Gifted and Talented
• QCA PE & School Sport
Investigation
• Step into Sport
• Professional Development
• Club links
• Swimming
• Sporting Playgrounds
PROGRESS
Ahead
• Overall delivery plan and
sub-delivery plans have been

84

updated and extended to run
up to 2008
• Target trajectories in place
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
Overall, 69 per cent of pupils in
partnership schools participate
in at least two hours of high
quality PE and school sport in a
typical week – up seven
percentage points from the
2003/04 survey. The ambition
by 2010 is to offer all children
at least four hours of sport
every week. This should
comprise at least two hours of
PE within the curriculum and an
additional two to three hours of
sport beyond the school day
(delivered by a range of school,
community and club providers).
A national network of sports
colleges and school sport

partnerships is supporting
delivery of this target. At
present there are 381
designated specialist sports
colleges, including ten
academies with a sports focus
and 80 per cent of schools are
now within one of the 411
operational partnerships.
The ‘Autumn Performance
Report 2005’ incorrectly stated
the percentage of PE teaching
judged by Ofsted to be good or
better. It should have stated
that Ofsted judged that in
2003/04, the quality of
teaching was good or better in
80 per cent (not 76 per cent)
of secondary schools and
60 per cent (not 62 per cent)
of primary schools.
Source of Data: The 2004-05 School Sport
Survey and 2003-04 Ofstead reports PE
subject reports.

PSA 2 TARGET
Halt the year on year increase in obesity among children under 11 by 2010,
in the context of a broader strategy to tackle obesity in the population as a
whole. (Joint target with DH and DfES).

INDICATOR
Prevalence of obesity as defined by National BMI percentile classification for children aged between
2-10 years (inclusive) measured through the Health Survey for England. Baseline year is weighted
average for three year period 2002-04.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The prevalence of obesity has trebled since the 1980s, and well over half of all adults are either
overweight or obese – almost 24 million adults.
If the number of obese children continues to rise, children will have a shorter life expectancy than
their parents.
Being obese and overweight means that you at more risk of the biggest killer diseases, such as
heart disease, cancer and Type 2 diabetes.
If current trends continue, at least a third of adults, a fifth of boys and a third of girls will be obese
by 2020.

PROGRESS
Not yet assessed
• Complex delivery chain, with
a wide range of delivery
agents and stakeholders
nationally, regionally and
locally. NAO reported on the
delivery chain.
• Delivery plan, including risk
register, milestones, trajectories
and trends being finalised

• Analytical work has identified
which work programmes will
contribute most to target,
which are the most cost
effective and will impact the
most on the children who are
likely to be obese in 2010
• Programme Board, Food &
Health Working Group and
Food & Drink Advertising
Forum meeting and will
review progress against
outputs/outcomes and adjust
work programmes accordingly

LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
Progress against the target will
be measured through the
Health Survey for England. The
baseline will be established for
the three year period 2002-04
once data from the 2004
Health Survey for England is
available in winter 2005-06.

85 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

PSA 3 TARGET
By 2008, increase the take-up of cultural and sporting opportunities by adults
and young people aged 16 and above from priority groups
INDICATOR
Increase the number who participate in active sports at least twelve times a year by 3 per cent, and
increasing the number who engage in at least 30 minutes of moderate intensity level sport, at least
three times a week by 3 per cent.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
This target represents a substantial challenge, with unprecedented increases in participation required
if it is to be achieved. In particular, it recognises the need to reduce inequalities in participation in
sport for key priority groups.

86

TATE GALLERY
SURFING IN CORNWALL

The target will be primarily
delivered through Sport England.
Their Delivery Plan includes the
following key elements:
• Marketing Sport – targeted
campaigning and marketing of
sport through Everyday Sport
and Active Places.
• Building the delivery system
– developing an effective
regional and local delivery
system for community sport
• Building capacity – improving
the quality and quantity of
clubs, coaches and volunteers
that are needed to support the
development of sport.
• Building Infrastructure –
providing the right facilities to
encourage greater
participation in sport
• Improving Performance –
new measurement of
participation at local level

in London and the South East.
• The Active People survey, the
largest survey of its kind ever
undertaken, is well underway.
Emerging results will be
available in June 2006.

through Active People survey;
driving up standards of local
authority service provision
through CPA/LAA/LPSA
mechanisms.
PROGRESS
Not yet assessed
• Complex delivery chain
involving many partners
• Sport England Delivery Plan in
place.
• New Sport England reporting
framework in place for
reporting against outcomes
and interventions
• New Funding Agreement has
strong focus on PSA target
• Sport indicators will form part
of the CPA assessment for the
first time in CPA 2006
• After a successful North-East
pilot, the Everyday Sport
campaign has been rolled out

LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
The estimates below are
provisional. The primary reasons
for this are because the final
weights will not be applied to the
data until the full year has been
gathered. In the interim period,
temporary weights have been
applied. Also, the estimates are
based on interviews achieved
over a six month period. Given
the timescale of the data and the
nature of the activities, certain
estimates will be influenced by
this seasonality.

Participation in active sport by priority group during the past four weeks

Black & minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
Women
All adults

At least 1 active sport

Percentage
RangeA

48.5
31.1
43.6
45.9
52.4

45.5 – 51.4
29.0 – 33.1
42.0 – 45.3
44.5 – 47.4
51.3 – 53.5

Participation in moderate intensity level sport by priority group during the past week

Black & minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
Women
All adults

At least 3x30

Percentage
RangeA

16.6
9.3
14.2
15.8
19.1

14.3 – 18.9
8.0 – 10.6
13.0 – 15.4
14.6 – 16.9
18.2 – 20.0

A. Using 95 per cent confidence interval.
Figures have been rounded to 1 decimal place.

87 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

INDICATOR
Increase the number who participate in arts activity at least twice a year by 2 per cent and
increasing the number who attend arts events at least twice a year by 3 per cent.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Despite relatively sustained levels of participation amongst disadvantaged groups the programmes
have not yet made a significant impact. Breaking down barriers to access and exploiting the full
wealth of UK culture have been key to our strategies in recent years.
This target will primarily be delivered through The Arts Council England, but for the first time we will
be engaging with non-DCMS delivery agents to increase participation across the sector as a whole.
The Arts Council delivery strand includes and comprises the following key elements:
• The utilisation of funding agreements with Regularly Funded Organisations and in turn with 3rd tier
organisations to drive progress in delivery for priority groups
• Targets for Lottery Capital and Grants for the Arts distribution
• Dissemination of lessons learnt and best practice from previous pilot programmes such as decibel
and the New Audiences programme and from new pilots as appropriate
• Development of better business models for arts organisations, including strategies for increasing
participation and attendance at arts events by priority groups
• Lessons will continue to be drawn and good practice disseminated from the New Audiences
Programme, which was a national action research programme (1998-2004) designed to test new
approaches to building and reaching new audiences.

PROGRESS
Not yet assessed
• Complex delivery chain, target not to be solely delivered through ACE
• Steering Group includes non-DCMS sponsored bodies
• ACE delivery plan in process of being finalised, to include details of priority group programmes
• Evidence being gathered on what interventions work
• Project working group convened to look at demand issues across the arts, heritage and museums
participation projects
• New Funding Agreement will have a strong emphasis on PSA targets
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
The estimates below are provisional. The primary reasons for this are because the final weights will
not be applied to the data until the full year has been gathered. In the interim period, temporary
weights have been applied. Also, the estimates are based on interviews achieved over a six month
period. Given the timescale of the data and the nature of the activities, certain estimates will be
influenced by this seasonality.

88

LOTTERY GOOD CAUSES

Young brass musicians

Attendance at arts events by priority group during the past 12 months

Black & minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
All adults

At least 2 events

Percentage
RangeA

21.9
23.6
17.4
32.8

19.5 – 24.4
21.7 – 25.5
16.2 – 18.7
31.8 – 33.9

Participation in arts activities by priority group during the past 12 months

Black & minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
All adults

At least 2 activities

Percentage
RangeA

20.4
18.5
16.1
23.8

18.1 – 22.8
16.8 – 20.2
14.9 – 17.4
22.9 – 24.7

A. Using 95 per cent confidence interval.
Figures have been rounded to 1 decimal place.

89 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

INDICATOR
Increase the number accessing
museums and galleries
collections by 2 per cent.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
We will continue to build on
the successful Renaissance in
the Regions framework and the
work of the National Museums
and Galleries programmes
Increasing participation. This
will be strengthened by closer
working with museums outside
of the DCMS sponsored
museums to share best practice
and develop joint programmes,
where possible.
We will build on the progress
that has been achieved by the
DCMS sponsored museums by:
• rolling out “Renaissance” to
the Hub museums in more of

the English Regions and so
increasing further the number
of visits from priority groups
• working with sponsored
National Museums and
Galleries to pursue particular
programmes aimed at priority
groups
• working with sponsored
National Museums and Galleries
to engage in partnerships with
museums and galleries in the
regions aimed at encouraging
participation from priority groups
PROGRESS
Not yet assessed
• Complex delivery chain, target
not to be solely delivered
through DCMS sponsored
museums
• Steering Group includes
non-DCMS sponsored bodies

• National museums and galleries
have provided lists of priority
group programmes
• Project working group convened
to look at demand issues across
the arts, heritage and museums
participation projects
• New Funding Agreements
include C2DE target
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
The estimates below are
provisional. The primary reasons
for this are because the final
weights will not be applied to
the data until the full year has
been gathered. In the interim
period, temporary weights have
been applied. Also, the estimates
are based on interviews achieved
over a six month period. Given
the timescale of the data and the
nature of the activities, certain
estimates will be influenced by
this seasonality.

Attendance at museums and galleries by priority group during the past 12 months

Black & minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
All adults
A. Using 95% confidence interval.
B. Figures have been rounded to 1 decimal place.

90

At least 1 visit

Percentage
RangeA

36.3
31.8
29.3
42.7

33.4 – 39.1
29.8 – 33.9
27.7 – 30.8
41.6 – 43.8

INDICATOR
Increasing the number
visiting designated Historic
Environment sites by 3 per cent.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
We will continue to attract
new users to the historic and
built environment through
established marketing and
events, which are proven to be
the most effective drivers for
increasing access.
We will strengthen our links
with non-DCMS sponsored
heritage organisations to share
best practice and develop joint
programmes where possible.
This target will be delivered
through English Heritage,
alongside other major heritage

organisations, with engagement
of the wider sector.

PROGRESS
Not yet assessed
• Complex delivery chain, target
not to be solely delivered
through DCMS sponsored
heritage bodies
• Steering Group includes nonDCMS sponsored bodies.
• Delivery plan being finalised
which will include
contributions from both
DCMS NDPBs and non-DCMS
bodies
• Project working group
convened to look at demand
issues across the arts, heritage
and museums participation
projects
• New Funding Agreement has
a strong focus on PSA target

English Heritage is developing a
variety of different programmes
and activities:
• Increasing visitor focus at
English Heritage properties
• Using the expansion of
Heritage Open Days and the
Blue Plaques Scheme to
broaden access at the local
community level
• Attracting new visitors to
English Heritage sites
• Specific projects run by
English Heritage, including
outreach, education and
events programmes
• National projects, including
projects run by others but
supported through English
Heritage’s grant programmes

LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
The estimates below are provisional. The primary reasons for this are because the final weights will
not be applied to the data until the full year has been gathered. In the interim period, temporary
weights have been applied. Also, the estimates are based on interviews achieved over a six month
period. Given the timescale of the data and the nature of the activities, certain estimates will be
influenced by this seasonality.
Attendance at designated historic environment sites by priority group during the past 12 months

Black & minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
All adults

At least 1 visit

Percentage
RangeA

47.3
58.0
57.5
69.7

44.3 – 50.2
55.9 – 60.2
55.8 – 59.1
68.7 – 70.7

A. Using 95 per cent confidence interval.
Figures have been rounded to 1 decimal place.

91 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

PSA TARGET 4
By 2008, Improve the productivity of the tourism, creative and leisure industries
The DCMS seeks to support this objective at a microeconomic level, with key projects designed to
impact on its sponsored industries. These take two forms: research aimed at understanding drivers of
performance in the industries; and policies informed by the research and other evidence.
Impact of these projects will be measured and assessed through analysis of the contribution the
Tourism and Leisure and creative industries make to UK productivity. This will be a long term project.
The base year for the data on productivity performance is 2002, and the trends in productivity up to
and including 2002 are shown in the graph with comments on page 81.
LATEST OUT-TURN DATA
Provisional data will be available from Office for National Statistics (ONS) December 2006/January
2007, but the final data will not be available until summer 2007.

92

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LICENSING ACT
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
This legislation reformed and streamlined archaic licensing laws, strengthening competition and
increasing choice and flexibility for consumers while providing a greater degree of local and
appropriate regulation and minimising harmful practices.
PROGRESS
On course
• Act fully implemented on 24 November 2005. Early indications positive – but clearly too early to
assess fully.
• Scrutiny Councils initiative launched and drawing together qualitative information about practical
effects of new regime on the ground.
• Guidance Review initiated – first phase to draw on issues raised during transition period.
• Fees Panel Interim Report published on 5 December 2005.

STONEHENGE
EDEN PROJECT
ICE SKATING

Somerset House

IMPLEMENTATION
OF GAMBLING ACT
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
When implemented the
Gambling Act will replace most
existing gambling law. It will
extend to the whole of Great
Britain. It puts in place an
improved, more comprehensive
structure of gambling
regulation, and creates a new
independent regulatory body
the Gambling Commission.
Currently, we are working
towards 1 September 2007
as the target date for full
implementation of the Act.
The main tasks needed to
be completed to meet this
target are:

• Establishment of the
Gambling Commission, its
relocation to Birmingham and
the development of its
approach to regulation.
• Parliamentary approval for
the secondary legislation
necessary for full
implementation of the Act.
• Working with licensing
authorities.
• Establishment of an
independent advisory panel
that will provide advice to
the Secretary of State about
which licensing authorities
should have power to issue
licences for casinos.
• A programme of research into
the prevalence of gambling
and problem gambling, and
its causes.

PROGRESS
On course
• Gambling Commission
established and launched
October 2005
• Programme of secondary
legislation being planned,
timetable published
• Independent Casino Advisory
Panel appointed and started
work October 2005
• Preparations in hand to
undertake Prevalence Study
in 2006
• Licensing authorities fully
involved, full consultation
through the premises licensing
group

93 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

DIGITAL SWITCHOVER IMPLEMENTATION
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The Government is committed to achieving switchover by 2012, starting in 2008. It has also
confirmed the region-by-region timetable and the scope of schemes which will be established to
help over 75s and those with significant disabilities make the switch.
Digital UK, an independent organisation set up by the public service broadcasters and multiplex
operators with representation from the digital television equipment retailers and manufacturers will
co-ordinate the switchover to digital television.
PROGRESS
On course
• Report on the Digital Television Project published March 2005
• Number of households adopting digital TV stands at 70 per cent (Ofcom)
• Project structure in place. Role and responsibilities of each party agreed. Project plans for each
workstrand in place
• Regulatory Impact Assessment published October 2005
• Cost benefit analysis shows quantifiable benefits of around £1.1- £2.2 billion (in net present
value terms)

The work is being managed as
a programme because of the
complex interdependencies
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
We are taking forward work with between the different projects.
our delivery partners, which will Our overall success will be
measured in terms of headline
focus on the investment, skills
tourism productivity increases
and competition drivers, and
ie. it will not be possible to
also innovation and enterprise.
prove the cause and effect
Resulting projects will be
between one work programme
complemented by a number of
enabling programmes and other and a certain amount of
productivity gain.
activities which will provide us
with the knowledge,
PROGRESS
infrastructure and influence
On Course
needed to underpin our
• External events can impact on
Programme. New projects will
tourism industry
come on stream, arising from
the conclusion of earlier
• Complex delivery chains and
projects or in response to
interdependencies. Largely
developments, or commissioned
rests on the ability to
by key stakeholders. Projects
influence other Departments,
will be evaluated in the light of
local and regional partners,
their conclusions.
and the industry

TOURISM

94

• Strategic priorities work
(marketing/e-tourism, quality,
skills and data) progressing
through to 2008
• Sector Skills Strategy in
development. Minister held
first Skills Summit.
• New UKTS data beginning to
come on stream – will provide
better indication of health of
domestic market
• Further work to take place on
how to measure the impact of
DCMS interventions.

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND,
SOUTH WEST

Artist Carole Waller working
on her paintings, laminated
between glass

CREATIVE
INDUSTRIES
PROJECTS
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
We initially focussed on two
priority projects most likely to
increase productivity and so
best deliver our PSA target: the
Creative Industries Intellectual
Property Forum and the film
co-production review. These
projects are supported by
ongoing policy work that either
seeks to address productivity
drivers across the sector or
maintains a fruitful
Government dialogue with the
film and music sectors. In 2005
we launched a new Creative
Economy Programme jointly
with DTI to bring greater
efficiency and coherence to
Government support for the

creative industries, and to
develop agreed priorities and a
new strategic platform for the
future. A key area of work is on
evidence and data. The
Programme is being taken
forward in consultation with
industry stakeholders.
PROGRESS
On Course
• Complex/long delivery chain –
sector mainly made up of
small businesses
• New Creative Economy
Programme (CEP) has been
launched for delivering
increased productivity
identifying key interventions
for Government.
• CEP will deliver interim results
in summer 2006, and final
conclusions in the autumn.
New Action Plan will flow
from CEP

• Good progress on film treaty
project, treaty with India
nearing agreement
• Intellectual Property Rights
project on track. New IP
stakeholder group to be set
up to monitor implementation
of recommendations from the
IP Forum

95 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

PSA DATA SYSTEMS
We do not directly collect the data for monitoring SR2002 PSAs. Our calculations of productivity (for
S2002 PSA 3 and SR2004 PSA 4) are based on data collected by the ONS Annual Business Inquiry (ABI).
Our SR2004 PSA3 Participation target is measured using data from the Taking Part Survey. Taking
Part is a continuous national survey of adults (aged 16 and over) from a representative cross-section
of private households in England that launched in July 2005. The survey also collects information
from children aged 11-15 (since January 2006 only).
PSA DATA LIMITATIONS
The data have some limitations when used to examine the reported changes in productivity:
• At low levels of disaggregation the estimates from the ABI may fluctuate as a result of the sampling
process and the complex way that Value Added is estimated. As a result trend changes are likely to
be more robust than year on year changes.
• Firms are classified by their main activity. The value added from any secondary activity will be
allocated to their main category. This could lead to under or over estimates in some cases.
• To make meaningful comparisons across time it is necessary to ensure prices are constant. GVA
figures are all expressed in 2002 prices, and an average annual GDP deflator is used.
• GVA and employment from Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes are split to make the
DCMS estimates of productivity. Constant proportions are used for tourism sectors such as bars,
restaurants etc and Creative Industries.

96

• The Inter-Departmental Business Register (IDBR), used for Office for National Statistics business
surveys, covers businesses that are registered for VAT and will not include small businesses whose
turnover is below the VAT threshold and who are not registered for VAT. The register will include
businesses running a PAYE scheme. This means that coverage of businesses in some sectors of the
creative industries will be limited.
DCMS DATA COLLECTION/OUTPUTS
In addition to the Taking Part Survey, DCMS also produces annual economic estimates of the
Creative Industries. Changes may be made to this statistical bulletin in light of the findings from the
Creative Economy Programme.
DCMS has also collected statistical data on Liquor Licensing, last published in October 2004.
Following the full implementation of the Licensing Act 2003, the scope and content of this bulletin
will be reviewed prior to any future release.
A Betting Licensing statistical bulletin was published in October 2003. Again, following the formal
launch of the Gambling Commission in October 2005, future releases of this bulletin will be reviewed.

LIVE PERFORMANCE

Performance artists at the
Eden Project
ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND,
SOUTH WEST

‘Relative’, a dance project
exploring the relationship
between children and their
grandparents
CULTURAL PROPERTY

Details of the Macclesfield
Psalter: a fourteenth century
manuscript

97 CHAPTER ONE, PART THREE

MANAGING
OUR RESOURCES

98

CHAPTER TWO

99 CHAPTER TWO

MANAGING
OUR RESOURCES
This section sets out key information on the internal management of DCMS.

100

EXTERNAL RECRUITMENT
The Department has systems in place to ensure that recruitment is carried out on the basis of fair
and open competition and selection on merit in accordance with the recruitment code laid down
by the Civil Service Commissioners. These systems are subject to regular internal checks.
During the year 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2006 we appointed 10 new staff through external
recruitment competitions as follows:
Grade

SCS
A
B
C
D

Male

Female

Total

Ethnic
minority

Disabled

3
1
3
0
0

1
0
1
1
0

4
1
4
1
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

The number of occasions this year where permitted exceptions to fair and open competition and
selection on merit were made (except for appointments of up to 12 months) is shown below by
category:
• inward secondments from outside organisation/bodies: six
GOVERNMENT ART COLLECTION

Jane Simpson, Our Distant
Relatives 2004

SENIOR CIVIL SERVICE SALARIES
28 Senior Civil Servants were in post at 1 April 2005. Details of their salary bands are below.

Salary Band £

50,000-54,999
55,000-59,999
60,000-64,999
65,000-69,999
70,000-74,999
over 75,000

Number of Staff

2
8
1
2
3
12

101 CHAPTER TWO

ETHNIC MONITORING INFORMATION
STAFF IN POST 1 APRIL 2005
Grade

SCS
A/B
C
D
TOTAL

% Ethnic
minority

% Unknown

In post

Target
March 2008

28
279
123
97
527

4%
7%
16%
30%
13%

14%
8%
7%
5%
8%

4%
4/5%
10%
21%

EXTERNAL RECRUITMENT
Number of applicants
Success at final interview

Total

% Ethnic minority

% Unknown

377
10

7%
10%

43%
0%

Total

% Ethnic minority

% Unknown

107
329
10

13%
14%
11%

5%
6%
10%

APPRAISAL
Highly successful
Successful
Acceptable

PROMOTIONS
From 1 November 2005, DCMS moved from a Promotion Board system to a promotion to post
policy whereby any member of staff applying for a post at the higher grade, and selected for the
post, would be made substantive.

Promoted

Total

% Ethnic minority

% Unknown

23

4%

0%

This table represents all internal DCMS staff who were successful at interview stage of open
competitions for posts which they took up on promotion since 1 April 2005.
Only two members of staff are included having been promoted under the new rules.

102

POSTINGS TO SENIOR CIVIL SERVICE (SCS)
Total

% Ethnic minority

6

0%

Total

% Ethnic minority*

% Unknown

379

18%

7%

Postings to SCS

TRAINING
Attendees

* 351 out of 379 staff attending training courses had declared their ethnic background – the percentage given as a percentage of these rather than
the 379 staff members who actually attended the courses.

SPECIAL BONUSES
Special bonus awards

Total

% Ethnic minority*

% Unknown

139

11%

4%

* 133 out of 139 staff awarded special bonuses had declared their ethnic background – the percentage is given as a percentage of these rather than
the 139 staff members actually awarded bonuses.

GRIEVANCES/ DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Formal grievances
Disciplinary action

Total

% Ethnic minority

% Unknown

1
2

0
1

0%
0%

Total

% Ethnic minority*

% Unknown

34

10%

15%

LEAVERS
Resignations

* 29 out of 34 staff who resigned had declared their ethnic background – the percentage is given as a percentage of these rather than the 34 staff
members who actually resigned.

103 CHAPTER TWO

PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS
DCMS is responsible for over 550 appointments to the boards of around 60 public bodies, making
more than 100 appointments or re-appointments each year. Most are national bodies with a high
public profile, and the majority are regulated by the Commissioner for Public Appointments.
The centralised Public Appointments Unit continues to apply robust selection procedures and
professional skills to all appointments. In addition to the annual cycle, this year we appointed the
boards of the Olympic Lottery Distributor and the Olympic Delivery Authority, two new bodies
created to stage the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2012.
We want appointments to draw on a richness and variety of viewpoints, ideas and experience. Of
the 124 appointments or reappointments made in 2005-06, 33 per cent were women, 10 per cent
were from an ethnic minority background and 4 per cent had a declared disability. Our Annual
Appointments Plan, which can be found at www.culture.gov.uk, includes targets to increase the
diversity of our appointments, as well as proposals for how to achieve them.

HONOURS
HM The Queen awards honours twice a year at New Year and on the occasion of her official
birthday in June. The award is public recognition of services given to an industry, profession or to
society in general.

DCMS is committed to ensuring that the honours list reflects UK society today, and is working
with the Cabinet Office to stimulate a wide range of public nominations from our sectors. We are
always keen to hear about men and women from all walks of life who are making a contribution
within our sectors that bring distinction and quality to UK life. Nominations for honours are
welcome from anyone at any time.

CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE PUBLIC
DCMS received 10,262 letters that required a response from the public in 2005. 5,686 (65 per
cent) were answered within our 20 working day target. We also received 4,514 letters from MPs
and Peers in 2005. 2,543 (56 per cent) were answered within our 20 working day target.

ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS – CONSULTANCY
Consultants bring a huge range of skills and experience to the department and help support both
the efficient administration and the programmes we deliver. It is difficult to forecast spending on
consultancy with accuracy because many projects are arranged at short notice in order to address
specific issues that arise in the year. The forecast spend in the 2005 Annual Report for 2005-06 was
£450,000 but the latest figures available suggest spending in the region of £825,000. This increase
included some additional consultancy following the successful bid to stage the 2012 Olympic and
Paralympic Games, but also on improving effectiveness and efficiency within the Department.
Examples of the latter include consultants’ advice on improving IT systems, and to advise on rent
and rate reviews on our accommodation. The latter generated savings over a 10 year period that
will substantially exceed the cost of the consultants.

104

The Department’s current forecast for spend on consultants in 2006-07 is again uncertain
particularly given the work that will need to be done in relation to the 2012 Olympics, but we
expect it to be in the region of £825,000

ACCOUNTING SYSTEM RE-IMPLEMENTATION
A new accounting system was introduced in early February 2006. The system will improve the
effectiveness of financial management and control within the Department and make business
processes more efficient. Centralisation of the invoice registration process and the electronic
authorisation of invoices has resulted in much less paper being used and passed around within the
Department. Increased use of the Government Procurement Card and a new electronic purchase
ordering system will improve purchasing decisions and reduce transactional costs. From April 2006,
grant in aid drawdown requests from the Department’s NDPBs will be processed electronically.
The new system will improve the quality and timeliness of financial information available within
the Department. A new and easier to use report writer will improve the quality and responsiveness
of financial reports and allow greater flexibility to meet changing organisational needs. It will also
mean that there will be no need to re-input financial data into off-system records. The total cost of
the system in 2005-06, including the software and the costs of accounting system technical
consultants, is expected to be c.£700,000.

INVESTMENT AND ASSET MANAGEMENT
Our current Investment Strategy was published on 20 June 2005 and is available online at
www.culture.gov.uk. It describes our plans for both new investment and the use of existing assets.

IMPROVING POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATORY
REFORM
We have established a Better Regulation Unit (BRU) with the aim of improving the Departments
delivery of the Government’s Better Regulation Agenda. In response to the recommendations of
the Better Regulation Task Force report Regulation – Less is More, Reducing Burdens, Improving
Outcomes and the Hampton Review, the Department created an Economic Impact Unit to take
forward the simplification and administrative burdens reduction projects. The Departmental BRU is
a point of contact for officials in the Department who may have enquiries about issues relating to
regulation as it relates to our sectors. It is also a point of liaison between the Department and the
Better Regulation Executive (BRE) in the Cabinet Office, and aims to raise quality and standards
across Departmental regulatory business.
We are in the process of setting up structures which will enable us to capture and assimilate
stakeholder views on better regulation. A better regulation seminar was held in early 2006 and
brought together all our major NDPBs, policy officials and representatives from the BRE. The
seminar acted as a catalyst in putting together a draft simplification plan. As a result we are
arranging a working group which will oversee and coordinate contributions and input from the
NDPBs into the simplification plan as well as the wider better regulation agenda. We plan to hold
similar seminars and working groups in the future.

105 CHAPTER TWO

A strategic level Better Regulation Task Force has also been established chaired by our Better
Regulation Minister, James Purnell. This group has responsibility for overseeing all the better
regulation work currently taking place. They will also have the responsibility for promoting Better
Regulation principles within the Department, and will also seek to champion better regulation of
our sectors notably the tourism and hospitality sectors across Whitehall.

REGULATORY IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (RIA)
One of the first tasks of the Better Regulation Unit was to ensure that there was a greater
awareness among policy divisions of the need for a RIA, and to foster an environment which
considers a RIA as an integral part of policy development. We have introduced a RIA training course
aimed at improving both awareness and quality. The course has been well received and will be
continued and reviewed as policy requirements change.
The Department fully complies with the Cabinet Office Better Policy Making: A guide to Regulatory
Impact Assessments, and the Departmental Better Regulation Unit working in partnership with the
BRE has an important role to ensure that this happens. RIAs have been produced when required. In
drafting the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Bill, the Department put together a
RIA that explained in more detail the thinking behind proposals for new regulations and the ways
in which the impact of those regulations will be minimised. The Bill also provides for many of its
provisions to be time-limited, so that they fall away after the 2012 Games.

CONSULTATIONS
Eleven consultations were started during the last year, of which eight were full consultations. Three
were consultations that lasted for less than 12 weeks, which were approved at Ministerial level. These
consultations are as follows, along with the reasons why they lasted for less than twelve weeks:
• Advisory Committee on Historic Ships. A full public consultation had already been held on the
development of a policy for Historic Ships and the creation of the Advisory Committee. Ministers
agreed that a shorter consultation period was appropriate on the implementation of the policy
through the appointment of the Committee.
• Permitted Temporary Activities and Temporary Event Notices. There were relatively minor
regulations which needed to be in force at least 10 working days before 24 November 2005,
when the licensing regime came into force. Building in time for the consultation responses to be
considered and Ministers to approve the final regulations and regulatory impact assessment
meant that the consultation period could not have been longer than eight weeks.
• Big Lottery Fund’s Transformational Grants Programme. Ministers agreed a shorter period of
consultation to avoid delays in launching the New Big Lottery Fund Programmes.
An example of how a good quality consultation has positively influenced policy formation was the
consultation on ‘Cultural Test for British Film (Schedule 1 to the Films Act 1985)’. Respondents
made clear in the consultation that alternative options for animation and documentary films
would be needed so as not to exclude these films from passing the test as so many of the

106

elements of the main culture test did not apply to these types of films. As a result the draft Order
provides for varied cultural tests for these types of films.

REGULATORY REFORM ORDERS
No Regulatory Reform Orders were delivered over the reporting year.

MANAGING THE ASSET BASE
We have direct ownership of a limited range of assets. Our delivery bodies own and manage a
wider range. These include heritage assets and non-transferable assets, which are intended to be
preserved in trust for future generations because of their cultural, environmental or historical
associations. Examples include historical buildings, archaeological sites, museum and gallery
collections, archives, burial mounds, ruins, monuments and statues.

ASSET DISPOSALS
Our general policy is to dispose of surplus assets at the appropriate time and encourage sponsored
bodies to do the same.
In 2005 we reviewed and consolidated our central London estate with the aim of reducing costs
and improving the efficient use of our assets. This has resulted in the disposal of a parcel of land
which was once part of Kensington Palace gardens as well as the sale of two residential properties
in Windsor. We also terminated a shared occupancy lease of accommodation in Woburn Place.

Our future disposal plans for Financial Year 2006-07 include the sale of land to the north of the
British Library and a further five residential properties in Windsor.
There is an outstanding political commitment to sell the Tote.

NEW INVESTMENT
Our Capital budget is set out in the table on page 114.

CAPITAL MODERNISATION FUND (CMF)
There are a number of ongoing projects which are funded from the Treasury’s Capital Modernisation
Fund (now closed to new bids). These include Culture Online (£10 million), the Listed Places of
Worship Scheme (£70 million) and the Lee Valley Regional Athletics Centre (£4 million).

INTERNAL AUDIT
The Unit’s work included risk management, control and governance issues. This contributes to the
embedding of sound risk management practice in the Department and supported the Accounting
Officer’s annual Statement of Internal Control. The work of the Unit also supports the Audit
Committee to discharge its responsibilities. The Unit continued to support the internal audit
services in our sponsored bodies with advice and guidance. With effect from 1 February 2006, the
Unit joined the Office of the Deputy Prime Ministers as part of a shared service agreement.

107 CHAPTER TWO

HEALTH AND SAFETY
The Health and Safety Committee continues to meet on a quarterly basis to receive reports from
appointed officers, make recommendations and sanction future activities. Training for Building
Control Officers continues through the Fire Service College. First Aid training is provided through
the Red Cross. A new computer-based training package to train staff in the use of DSE equipment
has been trialled and will be rolled out throughout the Department. The facilities management
contract was re-let in October 2005. The successful contractor has reviewed its Health and Safety
procedures on all areas of its operation throughout the Estate.
The Department is planning the refurbishment of its Cockspur Street offices during 2006-07 and
Health and Safety considerations have been included in the Project specification.

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (PAC) RECOMMENDATIONS
MANAGING NATIONAL LOTTERY DISTRIBUTION FUND BALANCES
A PAC report on National Lottery Distribution Fund (NLDF) balances in 2005 concluded:
• Distributors should not keep money in the Distribution Fund in case it is needed for as yet
unidentified future projects
• To reduce their balances distributors need to be less risk averse

• Slow progress has been made in reducing the balances held in the Fund
• A significant reduction in the overall balances depends on action by the Heritage Lottery Fund
and the New Opportunities Fund
• DCMS should set a new target and clear milestones for reducing the balances
• The successful bid to hold the Olympics in London in 2012 could have a significant impact on the
distributors, and therefore the pattern of balances.
The Department welcomed the Committee’s Report and the contributions they made to the
debate. Although Lottery money does produce some benefit as soon as it is awarded (eg by
levering in partnership funding) we agree with all the Lottery distributors and we agree that the
full public benefit is not delivered until the money is spent in the community and recognise that
Lottery proceeds should be passed more quickly to projects. As well as seeking to deliver as much
benefit in the community as early as possible, distributors must also invest in high quality projects
that meet demonstrable needs.
Although the target of reducing balances by half was not met in the period specified, setting a
demanding target did act as a driver for the substantial reductions achieved. The overall balance
continues to fall, and distributors’ forward commitments exceed it by over £1 billion.

108

The National Lottery Bill contains a measure which would change the way in which investment
earnings on the NLDF are shared between distributing bodies, to avoid unintentionally rewarding
those who hold high balances. It would also create a reserve power to reallocate an excessive
balance from an individual distributing body to another body to be spent on the same good cause
sector. The power would be used as a last resort if a distributor had persistently failed to take steps
to manage its balance to a reasonable level.
In our view, its power to give financial directions under section 26(3) of the National Lottery Act
1993 is not broad enough to allow it to direct distributors to set targets for the reduction of their
NLDF balances. Our guidance on balance management issued and the NAO report recommended
that distributors set targets for reductions in balances. We have encouraged distributors to comply
with this and all DCMS-sponsored distributing bodies, with the exception of UK Sport whose
balance is already very small, have set targets.
The distributors agree with us that the level of balances can be reduced further if a higher level of
risk is accepted. However, it is a matter for the Board of each NDPB to determine its risk appetite.

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND,
SOUTH WEST

Artist Jane Price with her
work of paper casts for the
Footsteps touring exhibition

109 CHAPTER TWO

DCMS ORGANISATION CHART
MAY 2006

RT HON TESSA JOWELL MP
Secretary of State for Culture, Media &
Sport, Minister for Women, Minister for
the Olympics

DAVID LAMMY MP

JAMES PURNELL MP

Minister of State for Culture

Minister of State for Media & Tourism

DAME SUE STREET DCB
Permanent Secretary

ISABEL LETWIN
Director, Legal

ANDREW RAMSAY

JEFF JACOBS

Director General, Economic Impact
& PSA target 4

Director General, Children
& Young People & Communities
& PSA targets 1, 2 & 3

BRIAN LEONARD

ALAN DAVEY

NICKY ROCHE

Director, Industry

Director, Arts & Culture

Director, Sport

Creative Industries
Mark Ferrero
Tourism
Kevin Williamson

Gambling & Lottery
Licensing
Andy McLellan
Lottery Distribution
& Community
Simon Broadley
Broadcasting Policy
Jon Zeff

Arts
Phil Clapp

Sport
Paul Heron

Museums & Cultural
Property
Paul Kirkman

PE, School Sport
&Club Links Project
Mike Diaper (DfES)

Government Art
Collection
Penny Johnson
Architecture &
Historic Environment
Harry Reeves
Humanitarian
Assistance Unit
Alex Towers

Royal Parks Agency
Mark Camley
Chief Executive

110

Local,
National &
International
Vanessa Brand

RT HON RICHARD CABORN MP

CLIVE ELPHICK

Minister of State for Sport

Non-Executive Director

PARMINDER VIR
Non-Executive Director

NICHOLAS HOLGATE
Chief Operating Officer & Efficiency
Review target

ANDREW LEAN

DAVID ROE

PADDY FEENY

Director, Olympic Games

Director, Strategy

Director, Strategic Communications

Human & Business
Resources
Shaun Cove
Private Office
Helen MacNamara

Public Bodies
Janet Evans

News &
Communications
Linda Martin
Information Systems
Mark O’Neill

Finance &
Planning
Keith Smith

KEY
PSA: Public Service Agreement
DCMS Agency:
Policy Sponsorship: ----------

111 CHAPTER TWO

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
TOTAL PUBLIC SPENDING

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Out-turn

2005-06
Estimated
Out-turn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

3,426,546

3,600,361

4,123,719

4,591,815

4,245,663

4,491,678

4,731,102

4,871,750

£ THOUSANDS
Consumption of resources:
DCMS
National Lottery
Total resource budget

801,579

943,721

683,277

718,832

705,996

824,954

764,714

669,714

4,228,125

4,544,082

4,806,996

5,310,647

4,951,659

5,316,632

5,495,816

5,541,464

1,040,525

1,004,282

1,209,879

1,223,076

1,331,479

1,470,632

1,535,816

1,571,464

1,358

178,217

165,910

127,372

232,615

323,817

370,689

306,669

of which:
Resource DEL
Capital spending:
DCMS
National Lottery

1,053,426

765,690

1,128,970

1,193,289

1,097,618

959,012

952,011

846,011

Total capital budget

1,054,784

943,907

1,294,880

1,320,661

1,330,233

1,282,829

1,322,700

1,152,680

24,365

33,087

43,967

123,469

144,615

229,829

276,700

226,680

5,282,909

5,487,989

6,101,876

6,631,308

6,281,892

6,599,461

6,818,516

6,694,144

of which:
Capital DEL
Total public

spending†

† Total public spending calculated as the total of the resource budget plus the capital budget, less depreciation

Spending by local authorities on functions relevant to the department
Current spending

1,736,543

1,840,253

1,921,554

2,100,794

2,107,458

-

-

-

46,719

54,488

57,135

60,987

138,404

110,631

-

-

453,737

505,725

489,493

444,828

510,567

-

-

-

320,802

371,923

314,816

848,858

857,885

165,000

-

-

of which:
financed by grants from budgets above
Capital spending
of which:
financed by grants from budgets above
Notes:
Prior year figures have been amended from last year’s reports as a result of:
1. a reclassification of Capital Grants from Resource DEL to Capital DEL in accordance with guidance received from HM Treasury - this affects all years in the table above;
2. the ONS announcement in 2005 that the licence fee income of the BBC was not a charge for a service but a tax. The impact of this is that the BBC is now classed as a Central
Government body and consumption of its resources will be recorded alongside other NDPB’s in the Central Government Sector.

112

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
RESOURCE BUDGET

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Out-turn

2005-06
Estimated
Out-turn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

3,426,546

3,600,361

4,123,719

4,591,815

4,245,663

4,491,678

4,731,102

4,871,750

407,472

302,327

405,828

763,664

450,031

403,174

544,905

549,219

293,606

172,713

262,635

314,984

318,970

252,630

410,403

416,042

Libraries

99,937

115,595

127,583

435,126

117,990

135,108

119,676

119,251

Museums, Libraries and
Archives Council

13,294

13,104

15,357

12,776

12,218

14,406

14,826

13,926

635

915

253

778

853

1,000

-

-

Arts

238,650

254,161

285,740

328,618

366,955

416,583

418,496

419,496

Sport

52,205

67,363

125,942

67,148

109,138

148,128

145,823

170,830

52,205

67,363

125,942

67,148

102,680

143,183

141,523

166,530

Space for sports and arts

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Olympics

-

-

-

-

6,458

4,330

4,300

4,300

137,282

132,848

142,688

348,490

162,297

169,663

158,342

158,795

-

-

-

-

1,501

1,650

1,600

1,600

The Royal Parks

24,424

41,854

25,675

25,771

26,655

19,916

25,812

25,812

Tourism

48,379

68,250

74,827

51,658

50,349

101,341

50,884

54,424

2,489,566

2,699,965

3,018,605

2,964,920

3,036,344

3,169,910

3,321,690

3,423,290

-

417

6,494

-

-

1

-

-

28,568

33,176

37,920

41,546

42,393

51,868

50,416

47,945

£ THOUSANDS
DCMS
Museums, Galleries
and Libraries
of which:
Museums and galleries

Culture Online

of which:
Sport and recreation

Architecture and the
Historic Environment
Regional Cultural Consortiums

Broadcasting and Media
Commemorative Services
(Queen’s Golden Jubilee)
Administration and Research
Unallocated Provision
Gambling and the National Lottery

-

-

-

-

-

9,444

13,134

20,339

801,579

943,721

683,277

718,832

705,996

824,954

764,714

669,714

801,600

944,800

681,087

716,808

702,382

816,000

736,000

644,000

-21
4,228,125

-1,079
4,544,082

2,190
4,806,996

2,024
5,310,647

3,614
4,951,659

8,954
5,316,632

6,714
22,000
5,495,816

2,714
23,000
5,541,464

of which:
National Lottery
Other gambling and gaming bodies
Olympic Lottery
Total resource budget
Notes:
Prior year figures have been amended from last year’s reports as a result of:
1. a reclassification of Capital Grants from Resource DEL to Capital DEL in accordance with guidance received from HM Treasury - this affects all years in the table above.
3. the ONS announcement in 2005 that the licence fee income of the BBC was not a charge for a service but a tax. The impact of this is that the BBC is now classed as a Central
Government body and consumption of its resources will be recorded alongside other NDPB’s in the Central Government Sector.

113 CHAPTER TWO

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
CAPITAL BUDGET

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Out-turn

2005-06
Estimated
Out-turn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

1,358

178,217

165,910

127,372

232,615

323,817

370,689

306,669

26,005

44,484

15,604

57,349

78,177

102,349

117,220

141,220

22,080

31,669

196

38,647

42,948

42,113

57,952

81,952

382

1,659

5,666

2,146

7,864

23,684

27,218

27,218

3,543

11,156

9,742

15,895

24,325

32,050

32,050

32,050

£ THOUSANDS
DCMS
of which:
Museums, Galleries
and Libraries
of which:
Museums and galleries
Libraries
Museums, Libraries and
Archives Council
Culture Online

-

-

-

661

3,040

4,500

-

-

153

1,224

1,551

2,876

942

200

200

200

1,497

1,212

13,676

44,274

49,485

71,005

118,354

36,334

1,484

633

3,576

3,236

21,902

32,835

41,354

36,334

13

579

10,100

41,038

27,583

2,100

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

36,070

77,000

-

Architecture and the
Historic Environment

9,916

10,382

17,695

20,240

19,487

43,001

35,810

40,810

The Royal Parks

2,549

118

1,421

4,922

2,567

1,051

1,880

1,880

600

662

1,158

451

764

1,162

600

600

-37,290

119,400

113,750

-3,960

78,848

96,950

86,130

72,130

-2,072

735

1,055

1,220

2,345

7,799

4,495

4,495

Arts
Sport
of which:
Sport and recreation
Space for sports and arts
Olympics

Tourism
Broadcasting and Media
Administration and Research
Unallocated Provision
Gambling and the National Lottery

-

-

-

-

-

300

6,000

9,000

1,053,426

765,690

1,128,970

1,193,289

1,097,618

959,012

952,011

846,011

1,053,400

765,200

1,128,913

1,193,192

1,097,618

959,000

864,000

756,000

26

490

57

97

-

12

11

11

-

-

-

-

-

-

88,000

90,000

1,054,784

943,907

1,294,880

1,320,661

1,330,233

1,282,829

1,322,700

1,152,680

of which:
National Lottery
Other gambling and gaming bodies
Olympic Lottery
Total capital budget
Notes:
Prior year figures have been amended from last year’s reports as a result of:
1. National Lottery outturn figures 2004-05 have been revised in accordance with actual outturn data.
2. a reclassification of Capital Grants from Resource DEL to Capital DEL in accordance with guidance received from HM Treasury - this affects all years in the table above.
3. the ONS announcement in 2005 that the licence fee income of the BBC was not a charge for a service but a tax. The impact of this is that the BBC is now classed as a Central
Government body and consumption of its resources will be recorded alongside other NDPB’s in the Central Government Sector.

114

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
ADMINISTRATION COSTS

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Out-turn

2005-06
Estimated
Out-turn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Paybill

13,665

15,378

17,238

18,657

19,814

22,812

21,423

20,451

Other

14,109

16,639

19,107

22,909

22,789

26,112

28,850

28,822

Total administration
Expenditure

27,774

32,017

36,345

41,566

42,603

48,924

50,273

49,273

-278

-238

-241

-2,231

-2,151

-2,863

-1,003

-1,003

27,496

31,779

36,104

39,335

40,452

46,061

49,270

48,270

Arts & Culture

7

7

10

11

11

13

14

13

Sport

4

6

4

4

5

7

7

7

Tourism, Libraries & Communities

4

6

4

6

6

6

7

7

Creative Industries, Broadcasting
and Gambling

5

5

6

8

8

9

9

9

Administration

7

9

12

10

10

11

12

12

27

33

36

39

40

46

49

48

£ THOUSANDS
Administration Expenditure

Administration income
Total administration budget
£ MILLION
Analysis by activity:

Total net administration costs

1. Both pay and other costs are likely to increase further in 2006-07 and beyond to accommodate work associated with the London Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2012. The budgets
and headcount for these activities have yet to be settled.

115 CHAPTER TWO

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
STAFF NUMBERS

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Out-turn

2005-06
Estimated
Out-turn

2006-07
Plans*

2007-08
Plans*

STAFF YEARS

Department for Culture,
Media and Sport
(Gross control area)

CS FTEs˚
Overtime
Casuals
Total

397
12
2
411

400
12
0
412

460
10
0
470

506
12
518

510
10
520

508
12
520

490.5
10
500.5

478.5
10
488.5

Royal Park Agency
(Gross control area)#

CS FTEs˚
Overtime
Casuals
Total

229
9
3
241
652

220
9
0
229
641

234
10
7
251
721

232
7
3
242
760

127
4
3
134
654

122
2
1
125
645

102
1
0
103
603.5

96
1
0
97
585.5

TOTAL DCMS

* Discussions about staffing for work related to the Olympic Games are still being reviewed. The outcome of these discussions is expected to increase headcount in future years.

˚ Until 2002-03 FTE data consisted of the staff in post averaged over the whole financial year. From 2003-04 onwards the data represents the number of staff in post (FTE) on the last day
of the financial year.
# Royal Parks Agency ceased to be subject to administration cost control from 2002-03. The fall in RPA staff numbers from 242 in 2003-04 to 125 in 2005-06 is the result of a planned
merger of the Royal Parks Constabulary with the Metropolitan Police. After the merger, RPC staff will no longer be Royal Parks Agency Member of staff.
DCMS no longer employs staff on a casual basis. Agency temps are excluded from the figures.

116

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
CAPITAL EMPLOYED

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-031
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Out-turn

2005-06
Estimated
Out-turn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

53

56

57

68

70

81

88

92

49

51

51

59

56

56

68

71

Creditors (< 1 year)

97

36

81

59

42

24

67

67

Creditors (> 1 year)

-94

-29

-96

-76

-52

-36

-77

-77

56

63

42

51

60

69

78

82

NDPB net assets

1307

1697

1870

3237

3260

3259

3521

3630

Total capital employed in
departmental group

1363

1760

1912

3288

3320

3328

3599

3685

£ MILLIONS
Assets on balance sheet at start of year:
Fixed assets
of which:
Land and buildings
Current assets

Provisions
Capital employed within
main department

Notes:
1. Out-turn figures from 2001-02 onwards are taken from the published consolidated DCMS resource accounts which include the Royal Parks Agency accounts.
2. Figures for 2003-04 include the effects of the quinquennial revaluation of the land and buildings of the museums and galleries sector.

117 CHAPTER TWO

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
FORECAST OF INDEMNITIES EXPECTED TO BE GRANTED
UNDER THE NATIONAL HERITAGE ACT 1980 TO NATIONAL
AND OTHER MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES

FORECAST OF MAXIM CONTINGENT LIABILITIES 2006-07

British Library

£s

45,700,000

British Museum

288,769,193

English Heritage

66,052,700

Geffrye Museum

408,600

Horniman Museum

124,200

Imperial War Museum
Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester
National Gallery

17,030,128
966,500
2,505,000,000

National Maritime Museum

32,370,000

National Museums Liverpool

117,521,885

National Museum of Science and Industry

99,760,724

National Portrait Gallery

42,387,000

Natural History Museum

15,155,248

Royal Armouries

33,262,630

Sir John Soane's Museum
South Bank Centre
Tate Gallery
Victoria and Albert Museum
Wallace Collection
TOTAL

150,000
123,750,000
3,017,746,044
465,160,321
13,423,531
£6,884,738,704

Notes:
These liabilities arise from indemnities given by the Secretary of State under the Government Indemnity Scheme, and made to lenders of heritage objects in lieu of insurance cover.
Indemnities in respect of each institution will fluctuate during the year, reflecting the number and value of loaned works of art in both temporary exhibition and changing gallery displays.
Values in this table are based on information available to museums, galleries and the British Library in March 2006. If the forecast maximum contingent liability for any institution is likely
to be exceeded, a minute will be presented to the House of Commons.

118

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
IDENTIFIABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICES
BY COUNTRY AND REGION

£ MILLION

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Plans

2005-06
Plans

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

North East

118.9

119.6

116.5

139.1

106.3

128.3

116.6

111.7

North West

249.9

204.9

233.4

208.5

181.7

255.7

224.3

209.9

Yorkshire and Humberside

159.2

179.4

215.6

210.5

155.3

233.0

214.0

200.5

East Midlands

157.7

129.5

147.3

147.0

124.1

136.2

126.0

120.3

West Midlands

171.4

155.2

169.4

175.6

137.9

171.7

159.4

149.1

Eastern

128.7

140.9

152.7

158.5

133.1

168.5

159.5

150.5

London

607.9

486.2

653.1

611.9

457.8

718.6

666.8

634.5

South East

282.2

222.8

233.7

272.9

222.6

270.1

259.2

250.2

South West

183.8

176.1

164.2

208.3

178.1

209.3

192.9

184.5

Total England

2059.8

1814.5

2085.9

2132.3

1696.9

2291.4

2118.7

2011.1

Scotland

116.6

136.0

148.1

161.0

102.7

190.5

183.2

152.8

Wales

162.6

151.4

175.9

159.9

156.9

188.9

183.8

172.6

54.7

49.4

45.3

57.9

29.8

36.2

32.7

29.4

2393.8

2151.4

2455.2

2511.1

1986.3

2707.0

2518.3

2365.9

Northern Ireland
Total UK identifiable expenditure
Outside UK
Total identifiable expenditure
Non-identifiable expenditure
Total expenditure on services

97.7

64.2

89.2

224.9

127.7

131.1

140.4

149.2

2491.5

2215.6

2544.4

2735.9

2114.1

2838.1

2658.7

2515.1

180.9

164.9

180.1

152.8

137.5

121.9

73.6

76.8

2672.4

2380.4

2724.5

2888.7

2251.6

2960.1

2732.3

2591.9

119 CHAPTER TWO

West Midlands

1.2

0.6

1.3

0.3

0.1

0.3

1.3

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.1

Total enterprise and economic development

1.4

2.4

1.3

0.7

1.5

0.4

0.2

0.4

1.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.0

South West

2.3

0.0

South East

1.3

Support for business

London

Regional policy

£ MILLION

Eastern

North West

East Midlands

North East

Yorkshire and
Humberside

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
IDENTIFIABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICES, BY
FUNCTION, COUNTRY AND REGION, FOR 2004-5

Enterprise and economic development

Recreation, culture and religion
Broadcasting
Heritage, arts, libraries and films

51.8

77.8

79.0

59.3

60.8

71.8

207.3

122.8

91.4

Lottery

38.1

81.2

57.0

46.0

59.2

46.2

193.9

73.4

71.8

2.3

3.8

3.3

2.7

2.9

3.3

6.1

7.6

4.0

Other recreation, culture and religion
Sport and recreation

12.7

16.4

14.5

15.3

13.5

11.4

49.5

18.1

9.4

104.9

179.3

153.9

123.3

136.4

132.7

457.0

222.0

176.6

Public sector occupational pensions

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.1

Total social protection

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.1

106.3

181.7

155.3

124.1

137.9

133.1

457.8

222.6

178.1

Total recreation, culture and religion
Social protection

TOTAL FOR: DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE,
MEDIA AND SPORT

120

Total Identifiable
Expenditure

0.0

8.7

0.0

8.7

0.8

0.0

0.8

47.8

48.6

9.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

9.6

0.0

9.6

47.8

57.4

0.6

0.0

92.7

0.0

93.3

0.0

93.3

89.7

183.0

822.0

10.2

8.2

4.9

845.2

122.7

967.9

0.0

967.9

666.8

88.2

50.6

23.9

829.4

0.0

829.4

0.0

829.4

36.0

2.1

3.1

0.6

41.8

2.6

44.3

0.0

44.3

£ Millions Totals

8.7

0.0

Non-Identifiable

Northern Ireland
0.0

0.0

Outside UK

Wales
0.0

0.0

UK Identifiable
Expenditure

Scotland
0.0

0.8

England
8.7

160.7

2.3

2.4

0.4

165.8

2.0

167.8

0.0

167.8

1,686.1

102.7

156.9

29.8

1,975.4

127.3

2,102.7

89.7

2,192.4

1.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.3

0.5

1.8

0.0

1.8

1.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.3

0.5

1.8

0.0

1.8

1696.9

102.7

156.9

29.8

1986.3

127.7

2114.1

137.5

2251.6

121 CHAPTER TWO

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
IDENTIFIABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICES,
BY COUNTRY AND REGION, PER HEAD

£’s PER HEAD

2000-01
Out-turn

2001-02
Out-turn

2002-03
Out-turn

2003-04
Out-turn

2004-05
Plans

2005-06
Plans

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

North East

46.8

47.1

45.9

54.8

41.8

50.7

46.1

44.2

North West

36.9

30.3

34.4

30.6

26.6

37.5

32.8

30.7

Yorkshire and Humberside

32.1

36.0

43.2

42.0

30.8

46.3

42.4

39.6

East Midlands

37.8

30.9

34.9

34.6

29.0

31.7

29.2

27.7

West Midlands

32.5

29.4

31.9

33.0

25.9

32.1

29.8

27.8

Eastern

23.9

26.1

28.2

29.0

24.2

30.4

28.6

26.8

London

84.0

66.4

88.6

82.8

61.6

96.1

88.7

83.9

South East

35.3

27.8

29.1

33.8

27.4

33.1

31.6

30.3

South West

37.4

35.6

33.1

41.7

35.3

41.3

37.8

36.0

Total England

41.8

36.7

42.0

42.8

33.9

45.6

42.0

39.7

Scotland

23.0

26.9

29.3

31.8

20.2

37.6

36.1

30.2

Wales

55.9

52.0

60.2

54.4

53.2

63.6

61.7

57.8

Northern Ireland

32.5

29.2

26.7

34.0

17.4

21.1

19.0

17.0

TOTAL UK IDENTIFIABLE EXPENDITURE

40.7

36.4

41.4

42.2

33.2

45.1

41.8

39.1

122

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
EXPLANATORY NOTES FOR THE PRECEDING TABLES OF
IDENTIFIABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICES, BY FUNCTION,
COUNTRY AND REGION

• DCMS spending is spread over a number of sub - programmes. Completion of the analysis of spending data was delegated to
programme managers and NDPBs.
• The spending data shown in these tables is consistent with the country and regional analyses (CRA) published by HM Treasury in
chapter 7 of Public Expenditure Statistical Analyses (PESA) 2006. PESA contains more tables analysed by country and region, and
also explains how the analysis was collected and the basis for allocating expenditure between countries and regions.
• The tables include the spending of the department and its NDPBs on payments to private sector and subsidies to public
corporations. They do not include capital finance to public corporations but do include public corporations capital expenditure. They
do not include payments to local authorities or local authorities own expenditure.
• The data are based on a subset of spending – identifiable expenditure on services – which is capable of being analysed as being for
the benefit of individual countries and regions. Expenditure that is incurred for the benefit of the UK as a whole is excluded.
• The tables do not include depreciation, cost of capital charges or movements in provisions that are in DEL/AME. They do include
salaries, procurement expenditure, capital expenditure and grants and subsidies paid to individuals and private sector enterprises.
• Prior years data have been reviewed and revised after being subjected to a more rigorous statistical analysis.
• Departmental spend which is allocated on a regional basis includes the grant to the Welsh Fourth Channel Authority, funding of
8 Regional Cultural Consortia, and grant to the GLA. Some NDPBs sponsored by the Department also allocated funding on a regional
basis eg the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council allocates funding to support regional museums, Arts Council England provides
support to a portfolio of regularly funded regional organisations.
• The figures were taken from the HM Treasury Public spending database in December 2005 and the regional distributions were
completed in January/February 2006. Therefore the tables may not show the latest position and are not consistent with other tables
in the Department report.
• Across government, most expenditure is not planned or allocated on a regional basis. Social security payments, for example, are paid
to eligible individuals irrespective of where they live. Expenditure on other programmes is allocated by looking at how all the
projects across the departments area of responsibility, usually England, compare. So the analysis shows the regional outcome of
spending decisions that have on the whole not been made primarily on a regional basis.
• The functional categories used are the standard United Nations Classifications of the Functions of Government (COFOG) categories.
This is not the same as the strategic priorities used elsewhere in the report.
Drawdown of Lottery funds from the national Lottery Distribution Fund in 2002/03 was lower, at just £1.9 billion, than the forecast
figure of £2.3 billion.
In 2003/04 there was a smaller shortfall between the actual figure of just over £1.9 billion and the forecast figure of £2.2 billion.
In 2004/05, the shortfall between actual outturn of just over £1.7 billion and the forecast of £1.8 billion was less than £0.1 billion.
Such shortfalls reflect the fact that a drawdown of grants by project operators is often slower that expected by Lottery distributing bodies.
There can be many reasons for this, for example delays in securing partnership funding or planning consents, or in getting
construction work under way.
However, the 2004/05 figures show that distributors and the Department are learning to take account of these factors and are
improving the accuracy with which they estimate drawdown.

123 CHAPTER TWO

INDEX
Architecture 37
Arts 33, 34, 36, 44, 45, 77, 88, 89
Arts Council 33, 34, 35, 44, 45, 69, 77, 88, 89
BBC Charter Review 22, 23, 72, 73
Better Regulation 105, 106
British Library 83, 118
British Museum 83, 118
Children and young people 27, 30
Children's Play 32
Communities 27, 40
Community Radio 50
Correspondence 104
Creative Economy Programme 23, 33, 62, 95
Creative Industries 62, 63, 95
Creative Partnerships 33
Culture Online 36, 113
Cultural Property Unit 48
Dance 34, 35
DCMS Change management 68, 69
Digital switchover 21, 57, 80, 94
Economy 27, 56, 57
Efficiency Review 67, 68

English Heritage 46, 83, 91, 118
Film 64
Gambling 21, 54, 59, 60, 80, 93
Government Art Collection 48, 49
Historic Environment 46, 47, 48, 78, 91
Humanitarian Assistance Unit 22
Intellectual property 63, 64
Internal Audit 107
International 23, 54, 55
Libraries 37, 38, 47
Licensing 21, 58, 59, 80 93
Local Government 28, 29
Modernising Delivery 27, 66, 68, 69
Museums and Galleries 22, 36, 46, 77, 78, 90
Museums and Libraries Archives Council 33, 78, 113, 114
Music 35, 64, 65
National Lottery 22, 50, 51, 60, 83
Obesity 31, 85
Olympics and Paralympics 20, 27, 70, 71
PE and School Sport 31, 75, 76, 84
Public Accounts Committee 108, 109
Public Appointments 104
Public Service Agreement targets 74-96
Regional Cultural Consortiums 28, 113

124

Renaissance 36, 46, 90
Royal Parks 21, 39, 53, 54, 113, 114
Sector Skills 65
Senior Civil Service Salaries 101
Sport 23, 31, 32, 41, 42, 43, 44, 55, 78, 84, 86, 87
Sport England 42, 43, 83, 86, 87
Strategic objectives 27
Sustainable Development 51, 52
Tourism 60, 61, 62, 80, 94
Voluntary Sector 28
VisitBritain 61, 62, 80, 83
Youth Matters and Respect 38, 39
Youth Music 35

ENQUIRIES
If you have any enquiries about the work or services of the Department please
contact General Enquiries on 0207 211 6200 or email enquiries@culture.gov.uk
You can also write to Ministers at the email addresses given below:
Secretary of State
Rt Hon. Tessa Jowell MP
tessa.jowell@culture.gov.uk
Minister for Culture
David Lammy MP
david.lammy@culture.gov.uk
Minister for Sport
Rt Hon. Richard Caborn MP
richard.caborn@culture.gov.uk
Minister for Creative Industries and Tourism
James Purnell MP
james.purnell@culture.gov.uk

125

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
DCMS would like to thank the following organisations
for supplying images:

Inside front cover head dress Scott Wilson for Swarovski
Runway Rocks
Back cover Veer Zaara courtesy of Yashraj Films

Alamy Images
Alan Edwards
Arts Council England, South West
BBC
Big Lottery Fund
Booktrust
Bowes Museum
Britain On View
EMPICs
Government Art Collection
Graham Bool
Heritage Lottery Fund
Jerry Hardman-Jones

Page 4 Arts Council England, South West image – Artist:
Jenny Beavan. Photographer: Kevin Clifford

Jez Coulson
Jon Walter
Laurie Fletcher
Lisa Mingay
London 2012 Olympic Bid
Mark Hankins
National Museum of Photography, Film & Television
Royal Ballet School
Sport England/Action Images
UK Film Council

Page 25 Mrs Henderson Presents film image courtesy
of Pathé Distribution

Page 8 Olympic host city announcement EMPICS/Max Nash
Page 10 Arts Council England, South West image –
Artist: Jane Mason and Duncan Sim. Model Amanda
Lawrence. Photographer: Mark Passmore.
Page 12 Preparation for the new Medieval and
Renaissance galleries at the Victoria and Albert Museum,
London. Photographer: Laurie Fletcher
Page 14 Wheelchair Basketball courtesy of Sport England
and Action Images
Page 16 Basketball game. Photographer: ©Timothy
Allen/Axiom Photographic Agency
Page 18 The Olympic Park from the air after the Games
courtesy of London 2012

Page 34 and front cover Dance image courtesy of
The Royal Ballet School. Photographer: Johan Persson
Page 49 Government Art Collection – Damien Hirst,
Pardaxin 2004 © Damien Hirst
Page 65 Vera Drake film image courtesy of Momentum
Page 69 Arts Council England, South West image – Artist:
Stephanie Johnson. Photographer: Simon Burt/Apex
Page 95 Arts Council England, South West image –
Artist: Carole Waller. Photographer: Kevin Clifford
Page 97 Arts Council England, South West image – Nikki
McCretton tours 'Relative', a dance project exploring the
relationship between children and their grandparents.
Photographer: Mark Passmore/Apex
Page 100 Government Art Collection – Jane Simpson,
Our Distant Relatives 2004 © Jane Simpson
Page 109 Arts Council England, South West image –
Artist: Jane Price. Photographer: Tim Cuff/Apex

Printed in the UK for The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
168282 05/06

126

Online
www.tso.co.uk/bookshop
Mail, Telephone, Fax and email
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 IGN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Fax orders: 0870 6005533
email: book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701

TSO Accredited Agents
(See Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers
ISBN 0-10-168282-4

Design www.spencerdubois.co.uk
Printed on Revive uncoated and Revive silk.

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office)
and available from:

TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London, WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF10 1PT
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588

Department for Culture,
Media and Sport
2-4 Cockspur Street
London SW1Y 5DH
www.culture.gov.uk
May 2006

ISBN 0-10-168282-4

9 780101 682824

department for
culture, media
and sport

SPONSORED
BODIES REPORT
2006

OUR AIM IS TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY
OF LIFE FOR ALL THROUGH CULTURAL
AND SPORTING ACTIVITIES, SUPPORT
THE PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE, AND
CHAMPION THE TOURISM, CREATIVE
AND LEISURE INDUSTRIES.

2

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

SPONSORED
BODIES REPORT
2006

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

3

EXECUTIVE NON-DEPARTMENTAL PUBLIC BODIES

6

ALCOHOL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH COUNCIL

7

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND

8

BIG LOTTERY FUND

11

BRITISH LIBRARY

15

BRITISH MUSEUM

19

CHURCHES CONSERVATION TRUST

22

COMMISSION FOR ARCHITECTURE AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT (CABE)

24

CULTURE EAST MIDLANDS (CEM)

26

CULTURE NORTH EAST

28

CULTURE NORTHWEST

29

CULTURE SOUTH EAST

31

CULTURE SOUTH WEST (CWM)

33

CULTURE WEST MIDLANDS

35

DESIGN COUNCIL

37

ENGLISH HERITAGE

39

FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA)

42

GAMBLING COMMISSION

43

GEFFRYE MUSEUM

45

CONTENTS

4

HERITAGE LOTTERY FUND (HLF)

47

HORNIMAN MUSEUM AND GARDENS

49

HORSERACE BETTING LEVY BOARD

51

IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM

52

LIVING EAST

54

MILLENNIUM COMMISSION

56

MUSEUM OF LONDON GROUP

58

MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY IN MANCHESTER

61

MUSEUMS, LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES COUNCIL (MLA)

63

NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND THE ARTS (NESTA)

65

NATIONAL GALLERY

67

NATIONAL HERITAGE MEMORIAL FUND (NHMF)

69

NATIONAL LOTTERY COMMISSION

71

NATIONAL MARITIME MUSEUM

73

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY

75

NATIONAL MUSEUMS LIVERPOOL

78

NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY

80

NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM

82

PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT (PLR)

85

ROYAL ARMOURIES

86

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

SIR JOHN SOANE’S MUSEUM

88

SPORT ENGLAND

90

TATE

92

UK FILM COUNCIL

94

UK SPORT

96

VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM

99

VISITBRITAIN

102

WALLACE COLLECTION

105

YORKSHIRE CULTURE

107

PUBLIC CORPORATIONS

108

BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION (BBC)

109

CHANNEL FOUR TELEVISION CORPORATION

110

HISTORIC ROYAL PALACES

111

HORSERACE TOTALISATOR BOARD (TOTE)

113

OFFICE OF COMMUNICATIONS (OFCOM)

115

SIANEL PEDWAR CYMRU (S4C)

117

OTHER BODIES

118

ROYAL HOUSEHOLD

119

TYNE AND WEAR MUSEUMS (TWM)

121

ADVISORY NON-DEPARTMENTAL PUBLIC BODIES

124

ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORIC WRECK SITES (ACHWS)

125

ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE GOVERNMENT ART COLLECTION

126

ADVISORY COUNCIL ON LIBRARIES (ACL)

127

ENGLAND MARKETING ADVISORY BOARD

128

LEGAL DEPOSIT ADVISORY PANEL

129

PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT ADVISORY COMMITTEE

130

REVIEWING COMMITTEE ON THE EXPORT OF WORKS OF ART
AND OBJECTS OF CULTURAL INTEREST (RCEWA)

131

SPOLIATION ADVISORY PANEL

132

TREASURE VALUATION COMMITTEE

133

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

5

EXECUTIVE NON-DEPARTMENTAL
PUBLIC BODIES
An executive Non-Departmental Public Body (NDPB) is set up by ministers to carry out a
service or function on behalf of the Government while not formally being part of any
government department. An executive NDPB is legally incorporated and has its own legal
identity. It is set up by Act of Parliament, Royal Charter, under the Royal Prerogative, or
incorporated under Companies Act legislation.
An executive NDPB has its own staff and its own budget. It is usually funded by Grant-in-Aid
or Lottery monies, given to the body on certain conditions, although it may also obtain
income from other sources. Board members are appointed by ministers, or officials on their
behalf, the Prime Minister, the Queen on the advice of ministers or, in some cases, by the
bodies themselves.
Ministers are ultimately answerable for the performance of executive NDPBs and have the
power (subject to Parliamentary approval, if necessary) to wind them up.

6

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

ALCOHOL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH COUNCIL
The Council has defined its current objectives in the following Statement of Purpose developed in 2002:
The Council seeks to develop the capacity of people and organisations to address alcohol issues and also
develop the evidence base linked to alcohol policy. Effective dissemination of this evidence to researchers,
policy makers and practitioners is an important component of the strategic intent.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

0.631
0.342
0.166
0.508

0.705
0.813
0.083
0.896

0.620
0.660
0.175
0.835

0.630
0.500
0.210
0.710

0.630
0.500
0.210
0.710

Resources £ millions
Income
Grant Award costs
Administration costs
Total expenditure

Key Achievements in 2005
• Twenty-two applications for major grants were received this year, seven of which were funded.
• The programme of small grants (less than £5,000) has again been popular and eighteen projects have been funded so far in this
financial year.
• The studentship scheme funded twelve new students this year. In total, we currently support twenty-six students.
• Two of our Research and Development priorities this year are progressing well. One focused upon strengthening communities and
the other on strengthening families. Both are evidence-based action programmes.

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.02.02

31.01.08

01.02.05

01.04.00
01.04.04
01.04.04
01.04.01
15.05.02
01.04.04
01.04.04
01.04.01
01.04.04
01.04.04
01.04.00
01.08.03
01.04.01
01.04.00

31.03.06
31.03.07
31.03.07
31.03.07
14.05.08
31.03.07
31.03.07
31.03.07
31.03.07
31.03.07
31.03.06
31.07.06
31.03.07
31.03.06

01.04.03

Personnel
Chairman
Dr Noel D L Olsen
Director
Professor Ray J Hodgson
Current members
Dr Jonathan Chick
Ms Jean Coussins
Ms Joyce Craig
Professor Ilana Crome
Ms Rhoda Emlyn-Jones
Professor David Foxcroft
Mr Ian Ford
Mr Peter Harraway
Professor Gerard Hastings
Professor Richard Hobbs
Dr John Kemm (Chair of the Research Committee)
Dr Pui Ling-Li
Ms Gaye Pedlow
Mrs Daljit Sidebottom
(Chair of the Developing People & Organisations Committee)

01.04.04
15.05.05

01.04.04

01.04.03
01.04.04
01.04.03

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

7

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND
Arts Council England (ACE) is the national development agency for the arts in England, working at arm’s
length from government, to distribute public money from government and the National Lottery to artists and
arts organisations. Between 2003 and 2006, the Arts Council will invest £2 billion of public funds in the
arts in England.
The Arts Council’s vision is to promote the arts at the heart of national life, reflecting England’s rich and
diverse cultural identity. Central to this vision is the belief that that the arts have the power to transform lives
and communities, and to create opportunities for people throughout the country.
For 2003 to 2006 the Arts Council’s ambitions are:
• supporting the artist
• enabling organisations to thrive, not just survive
• championing cultural diversity
• offering opportunities for young people
• encouraging growth
• living up to Arts Council values

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other1
Total
1

2003-04
Actual
Outturn

2004-05
Actual
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

325.0
9.4
334.4

368.9
9.8
378.7

414.5
11.5
426.0

414.5
3.0
417.5

410.5
3.0
413.5

Other incoming resources such as grants, sponsorship and donations.

Key Performance Indicators
Funding Agreement 2003 – 2006: Planned Activities
Creative Partnerships
To increase the number of Creative Partnerships in deprived areas to 36 by 2006.
Phase 1:
Sixteen Creative Partnerships to be set up by September 2003
Phase 2:
Nine further Creative Partnerships to be set up by September 2004
Phase 3:
Eleven further Creative Partnerships to be set up by September 2005

Achieved
Achieved
Achieved

Arts Participation
Progress against PSA2 targets

Priority Group
Disabled people
Socially excluded
Black and minority ethnic

Attendance
Baseline

Attendance
PSA2 target

Attendance
Actual to Date

Participation
Baseline

Participation
PSA2 target

Participation
Actual to Date

29%
23%
32%

32%
26%
35%

26%
26%2
30%

12%
10%
15%

14%
12%
17%

12%
9%
11%2

This table is based on the most up to date figures compiled in early 2005. The final report on outcomes against PSA2 will be due in
December 2006.
2

8

Change from baseline is statistically significant.

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND
Regularly Funded Organisations (RFOs)
Number of commissions of new work RFOs
Attendance at RFOs (thousands)
Attendance at educational sessions of RFOs (thousands)

2003-04
Actual

2004-05
Target

2005-06
Target

2006-07
Target

2007-08
Target

4,049

3,000

3,000

3,000

3,000

31,428

26,900

27,500

28,050

28,611

3,234

2,210

2,210

2,210

2,210

Targets will be reassessed in light of actual achievements from 2004-05.

Evaluation and customer satisfaction
The results of our first customer satisfaction survey were published in 2005 and are available from our website
www.artscouncil.org.uk. We will use the results to help us to deliver our corporate objective of offering a high quality service to
customers and clients.
2003-04
Actual
Outturn

2004-05
Actual
Outturn

2005-06
Target

2006-07
Target

2007-08
Target

Administrative savings target

5.0

6.0

6.7

n/a

n/a

Actual administrative savings

5.6

7.0

–

–

–

Efficiency savings
£ millions

The above figures relate to target savings from the merger in April 2002 set by the Arts Council for the period 2003 to 2006.
For future years these have been replaced by our efficiency delivery plan.

Key Achievements in 2005
Grants for the arts, our major open application programme which launched in 2003, continues to be a success. During 2005 we
made over 3,700 grants worth £58 million, including over 1,200 grants to individual artists. By March we had achieved our target of
10 per cent by value of grants going to Black and minority ethnic artists and organisations.
In March, we published the findings of an extensive evaluation of the programme undertaken by external consultants. The findings
from the evaluation were very positive. ‘Grants for the arts’ was described as a brave and radical initiative which has transformed
our grant giving. We used these findings to launch an improved and refined version of the programme in September. ‘Grants to
organisations’ and national touring are funded through the National Lottery.
2005 saw the opening of a number of exciting venues funded by our ambitious lottery capital programme including the De La Warr
Pavilion in East Sussex, the Unicorn Theatre and Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan Centre in London and the Belgrave Baheno Peepul Centre in
Leicester.
In March 2005 we announced funding to over 1,100 regularly funded organisations up to March 2008. We reviewed the portfolio
of organisations we fund and made decisions based on providing financial stability for most arts organisations and ensuring that
organisations with major capital developments have the revenue funding to reach their potential. By 2008, Black and minority
organisations will make up eleven per cent of the portfolio, surpassing the ten per cent target that we set ourselves.
Our Own Art scheme is designed to help people buy original, contemporary art and craft by providing interest free loans to
members of the public. It is already generating sales of around £2 million a year. Galleries in London will be joining the scheme in
2006.
In June 2005 the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority accredited our young people’s Arts Award scheme. The scheme, which is
run in partnership with Trinity College London, was launched across England in October 2005. The Arts Award will give thousands of
young people recognition for their participation in the arts. It is the first accredited scheme to underpin the development of young
artists and young arts leaders aged 11 to 25.
Creative Partnerships provides school children across England with the opportunity to develop creativity in learning and to take part
in cultural activities of the highest quality. By September 2005, all of the 36 Creative Partnerships we were committed to
establishing were up and running. The total number of projects started between May 2002 and April 2005 was 3,352. A total of
20,552 teachers were involved in these projects.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

9

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND
Personnel for the period
1 January 2005 – 31 December 2005

Start date

End date

Chair
Sir Christopher Frayling

02.02.04

02.02.08

Mr Diran Adebayo
Sir Norman Adsetts OBE (Yorkshire)
Ms Janet Barnes (Yorkshire)
Mr Tom Bloxham MBE (North West)
Deborah Bull CBE
Deborah Grubb (South East)
Lady Sue Woodford-Hollick (London)
Ms Kentaké Chinyelu-Hope (South East)
Professor Alan Livingston (South West)
Stephen Lowe (East)
Mr Francois Matarasso (East Midlands)
Sir Brian McMaster CBE
Ms Elsie Owusu OBE
Dr Tom Shakespeare (North East)
Mr William Sieghart
Professor Stuart Timperley (East)
Ms Dorothy Wilson (West Midlands)

20.10.04
01.06.02
01.02.05
01.06.02
01.06.02
01.06.02
01.06.02
01.10.05
01.06.02
01.06.02
01.10.05
01.06.02
01.06.02
01.10.04
30.06.00
01.06.02
01.06.02

19.10.08
31.01.05
31.01.09
31.05.06
31.05.05
31.05.05
31.05.06
30.09.09
31.05.06
31.05.05
30.09.09
31.05.08
31.05.09
30.09.08
31.05.06
31.05.06
31.05.09

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
Mr Peter Hewitt
Council Members

31.05.04

31.05.04
31.05.05
31.05.05
01.07.02
01.07.04
01.06.05

Analysis of Grant-in-Aid expenditure
Summary of RFO funding by Region
(including delegated organisations)
East
East Midlands
London
North East
North West
South East
South West
West Midlands
Yorkshire
National
Total

Actual
2003-04

Actual
2004-05

Budget
2005-06

Budget
2006-07

Budget
2007-08

6,930,703
7,623,776
129,880,799
9,369,871
17,141,023
10,297,787
11,125,267
31,357,469
19,123,553
12,699,355
255,549,603

7,836,092
8,574,928
141,461,145
10,632,255
19,056,755
11,770,528
12,721,352
33,524,800
21,763,681
12,067,922
279,409,457

8,315,690
9,267,069
152,343,445
11,340,778
20,437,536
12,606,416
14,112,581
35,443,274
23,305,120
13,625,250
300,797,158

8,696,000
9,752,000
158,839,500
12,662,200
22,297,000
13,184,000
14,763,000
36,683,100
24,448,500
13,847,300
315,172,600

8,966,000
10,008,000
164,484,200
13,530,300
22,928,000
13,579,000
15,205,000
37,722,300
25,314,800
14,064,200
325,801,800

The 2004-05 Annual Review is available from: Arts Council England, 14 Great Peter Street, London SW1P 3NQ and also from
www.artscouncil.org.uk

10

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

BIG LOTTERY FUND
The Big Lottery Fund is the operating name of the National Lottery Charities Board and the New Opportunities
Fund, both executive Non-Departmental Public Bodies, working jointly together pursuant to the administrative
merger in June 2004.
Community Fund (National Lottery Charities Board)
The Community Fund is responsible for distributing Lottery grants to charitable, benevolent or philanthropic
organisations funding projects mainly to help the needs of those at greatest disadvantage in society and also
to improve the quality of life in the community. Decisions on applications are made by Board members sitting
on grant making committees for England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and in the United Kingdom as a
whole (through the Strategic Grants committee).
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn1

2006-07
Plans1

2007-08
Plans
(As the Big
Lottery Fund)2

5,473
262
291
28
–

5,058
199
253
29
3

n/a
327
235
30
4

n/a
235
220
29
4

Resources and key performance indicators
No of awards made
Value of awards made £m
Value of awards paid £m
Running costs £m
Merger and restructuring
costs £m

n/a
708
697
56
–

1

From 1 June 2004 the Community Fund and New Opportunities Fund have administratively merged to form the Big Lottery Fund. Until Parliament passes the
necessary legislation both bodies remain as legal entities. The figures for 2005-06 and 2006-07 represent the Community Fund’s expected share of grant making
and running costs.
2
Figures for 2007-08 are for the Big Lottery Fund and incorporate activities previously undertaken by the Community Fund and New Opportunities Fund.

Key Achievements
During the financial year 2004-05 the Community Fund awarded 5,058 grants worth £199m under its grant programmes for large
and medium projects, Awards for All, Research and the International grants programme for UK based charities working abroad. The
smallest grants were worth £500 and the largest £2,200,000; the average award was £39,318. Except for Awards for All these
programmes were closed to applications during 2005-06.
New programmes, branded as Big Lottery Fund programmes, were launched in November 2005.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

11

BIG LOTTERY FUND
Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chair
Sir Clive Booth

01.06.04

30.11.061

01.06.05

Chief Executive
Stephen Dunmore

01.12.03

26.07.00
15.06.04
01.06.04
05.09.01
15.06.04
01.06.04
15.06.04

01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06

01.06.04

01.06.04
26.07.00
01.04.03
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04

01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06

Personnel (Community Fund)

Board members2
Dame Valarie Strachan, DCB (Deputy Chair)
Dr Samuel Burnside (Northern Ireland)
David Campbell CBE (Scotland)
Paul Cavanagh (Northern Ireland)
Tom Davies (Wales)
Roland Doven MBE
Professor Briedge Gadd CBE
(Northern Ireland)
John Gartside OBE
Douglas Graham (Scotland)
Taha Idris (Wales)
Dugald Mackie
John Naylor OBE (Scotland)
Ester O’Callaghan
Anna Southall
Huw Vaughan Thomas (Wales)
Diana Whitworth
1
2

01.06.04

01.06.04
01.06.04

Or until provisions establishing the new Lottery distributor if earlier.
All current Board members were initially appointed until 01.11.05. In June 2005 this was extended to 01.11.06 or until provisions establishing the new distributor
if earlier.

Notes:
Since 9 April 2001, the Community Fund has been the operating name of the National Lottery Charities Board. There are 17
members of the Board of the Community Fund, including the Chair and Deputy Chair.
The Secretary of State invited all Board members to remain in office until the new co-terminous Boards were appointed for the
Community Fund and the New Opportunities Fund, in some cases beyond their current term of office. The new co-terminous Board
came into being on 01.06.04.

12

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

BIG LOTTERY FUND
New Opportunities Fund
The New Opportunities Fund is responsible for distributing Lottery grants for health education and
environment projects, with a particular focus on the needs of those at greatest disadvantage in society and
also to improve the quality of life in the community. Decisions on applications are made by the Board or by
grant making committees chaired by Board members.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn1

2006-07
Plans1

504
613
32
–

573
491
33
2

392
546
32
4

471
526
31
4

Resources and key
performance indicators
Value of awards made £m
Value of awards paid £m
Running costs £m
Merger and restructuring
costs £m

2007-08
Plans
(As the Big
Lottery Fund)2
708
697
56
–

1

From 1 June 2004 the Community Fund and New Opportunities Fund have administratively merged to form the Big Lottery Fund. Until Parliament passes the
necessary legislation both bodies remain as legal entities. The figures for 2005-06 and 2006-07 represent the New Opportunities Fund’s expected share of grant
making and running costs.
2
Figures for 2007-08 are for the Big Lottery Fund and incorporate activities previously undertaken by the Community Fund and New Opportunities Fund.

Key Achievements
By 31 March 2005 the New Opportunities Fund had awarded grants valued at over £2.9 billion of the £3.1 billion available for
distribution, including £300m on a national network of healthy living centres; £450m on out of school hours learning and childcare,
creating 900,000 childcare places and out of school clubs in 12,000 schools; £751m on PE and sports facilities in schools and a
further £100m on community sport investment; and the launch of the veterans programme to support events commemorating the
60th anniversary of the end of Second World War.
New programmes, branded as Big Lottery Fund programmes, were launched in November 2005.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

13

BIG LOTTERY FUND
Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chair
Sir Clive Booth

01.06.04

30.11.061

01.06.05

Chief Executive
Stephen Dunmore

01.12.03

Board members2
Dame Valarie Strachan, DCB (Deputy Chair)
Dr Samuel Burnside (Northern Ireland)
David Campbell CBE (Scotland)
Paul Cavanagh (Northern Ireland)
Tom Davies (Wales)
Roland Doven MBE
Professor Briedge Gadd CBE (Northern Ireland)
John Gartside OBE
Douglas Graham (Scotland)
Taha Idris (Wales)
Dugald Mackie
John Naylor OBE (Scotland)
Ester O’Callaghan
Anna Southall
Huw Vaughan Thomas (Wales)
Diana Whitworth

01.06.04
15.06.04
20.07.98
15.06.04
20.07.00
01.06.04
01.05.01
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04
20.07.98
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04

Personnel (New Opportunities Fund)

1
2

01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06
01.11.06

01.06.04
01.06.04
01.06.04

01.06.04

Or until 01.06.05 provisions establishing the new Lottery distributor if earlier.
All current Board members were initially appointed until 01.11.05. In June 2005 this was extended to 01.11.06 or until provisions establishing the new distributor
if earlier.

Notes:
Until 01.06.04 there were 13 members of the Board of the New Opportunities Fund, including the Chair. From 01.06.04 there are
17 members of the Board of the New Opportunities Fund, including the Chair and Deputy Chair.
The Secretary of State invited all Board members to remain in office until the new co-terminous Boards were appointed for the
New Opportunities Fund and the Community Fund, in some cases beyond their current term of office. The new co-terminous Board
came into being on 01.06.04.

14

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

BRITISH LIBRARY
The British Library is the national library of the United Kingdom and an international research library of world
renown. The Library holds a wealth of global knowledge, accumulated in its collections and embodied in the
expertise of its staff. Every day, new knowledge enters the Library’s collections, and every minute it delivers
knowledge – to scholars, to innovators, to people learning more about the world. The Library exists for anyone
who wants to do research – for personal, work-related or academic purposes.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

89.2
29.6
118.8
97.2
13.8
2.6
5.2
118.8

88.5
32.5
121.0
96.2
13.9
2.4
8.5
121.0

96.3
29.6
125.9
94.2
15.8
2.7
13.2
125.9

102.2
32.1
134.3
96.3
17.2
2.8
18.0
134.3

104.4
24.7
129.1
96.1
18.2
2.8
12.0
129.1

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Receipts
Total income
Operating costs
Acquisitions
Conservation and binding
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

Notes
The planned receipts for 2006-07 include £5.9m in respect of external income to partly fund the Conservation Studios.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

15

BRITISH LIBRARY
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-071
Plans

2007-081
Plans

110,859

124,151

237,500

–

–

Number of learners attending educational sessions

n/a3

n/a3

n/a3

7,500

7,500

Number of visitors to BL learning website

n/a3

n/a3

n /a3

200,000

210,000

Number of visitors to the BL’s on-site and
virtual exhibitions4

557,136

614,915

804,680

880,000

931,000

9,721,574

14,702,594

23,000,000

25,000,000

26,000,000

n/a3

59%

65%

n/a3

n/a3

2,477,535

2,841,929

2,500,000

959,900

969,700

n/a3

n/a3

n/a3

95%

95%

5,320,032

5,291,864

5,600,000

6,246,900

5,914,750

397,940

394,010

455,000

410,000

410,000

Customer satisfaction: Reading rooms

92%

92%

90%

90%

90%

Customer satisfaction: Document supply UK users

83%

84%

83%

82%

82%

Customer satisfaction: Exhibitions

98%

98%

98%

98%

98%

Efficiency savings (cash £13.9m + non-cash)

n/a3

n/a3

n/a3

£13.2m

£13.9m

Key Performance Indicators
Learners attending educational sessions
+ Number of visitors to BL ‘learning’ website2

Number of searches of BL’s online catalogue5
Number of children attending educational sessions
from inner city schools
Items acquired (excluding donations from 2005-06)6
Percentage of material (books) acquired through
legal deposit
Number of items supplied/consulted remotely
and on-site7
Number of visits to reading rooms

1

At the time of compilation, the Library’s Funding Agreement for 2006-2008 was awaiting final formal agreement.
Several factors have contributed to the increase in visitors to the BL learning website. These include the launch of the Texts in Context site which attracted much
press interest; despatch of the quarterly Learning Newsletter; and greater prominence of the learning website on the Library’s homepage at www.bl.uk.
3
Target was not included in the British Library’s 2003-04 to 2005-06 Funding Agreement with DCMS.
4
This is a composite measure. Visitors to on-site exhibitions are below forecast as a result of the terrorist attacks in July 2005. However, visitors to virtual exhibitions
have been are far greater than target. A new online gallery was launched in April 2005. This has consolidated and improved the Library’s web content for the general
public. Digital content created to coincide with the Library’s Hans Christian Andersen exhibition went live in May. Both Turning the Pages (now located within the
Online Gallery) and the successful Alice launch has increased figures within the Online Gallery. The new Beautiful Minds virtual exhibition was launched and this
runs alongside the physical exhibition. From 2005-06 the measure of on-site visitors is to be extended to encompass all public access facilities, including auditorium
events for the public.
5
Use of the web has far exceeded targets set. The DCMS target was set in 2003 and was based on predicted use of the old British Library Public Catalogue (BLPC).
The new Integrated Catalogue system records usage in a different way from BLPC as it records single searches as multiple searches in cases where there is a multiword phrase with no match. The old catalogue was available to remote users but not to reading room users. The new Integrated Catalogue is available to all users,
regardless of location. The year end forecast is based on use of the new system.
6
Items acquired include monographs, newspaper issues, patents, electronic purchased and electronic voluntary deposit. Donations have been excluded from 2005-06
because the Library has no control over the numbers of items donated and consequently this can cause the measure to fluctuate.
7
From 2005-06, the measure of items consulted is to be extended to encompass the number of items consulted online, by users over the web.
2

16

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

BRITISH LIBRARY
Key Achievements in 2005-06
The British Library’s major achievements during the year include:
On 29 June 2005, the British Library published its three-year corporate strategy Redefining the Library: The British Library’s Strategy
2005-2008. The strategy sets out what it means to be a great library in the 21st century. While the strategy nurtures traditional
strengths, it also recognises the need to respond ever more quickly to a new generation of researchers and library users who expect
much more focus on digital services and resources. The Library has made significant progress towards the achievement of its
strategy in 2005-06, the first year of implementation of the Plan.
Strategic priority 1: Enrich the user’s experience
• Develop Business and Intellectual Property Centre. In May, the Library secured £1m of funding over two years from the London
Development Agency to enable it to take forward the development of its Business and Intellectual Property Centre. This new
initiative will support entrepreneurs and SMEs from concept to successful commercialisation. Construction of the Centre
commenced in November and the opening took place on 8 March 06.
• Develop and launch portal BL Direct. In June, the Library launched British Library Direct, a portal that has been designed to enable
free searching and credit card ordering from the Library’s top 20,000 research journals. For the first time, customers can search the
Library’s database free of charge and then order articles for remote use and pay by credit card.
• Hold two major temporary exhibitions. Our first major exhibition Hans Christian Andersen, celebrated the bicentenary of the birth
of Denmark’s most famous writer and explored how his fairy stories reflect his true life story. Our second major exhibition
Beautiful Minds celebrated the history of the Nobel prize, exploring in depth the stories of some 30 prize winners.
Strategic priority 2: Build the digital research environment
• Digitise newspapers and sound recordings. Made possible with £3.1m of JISC funding, we made very good progress during the
course of the year towards digitising up to 2 million pages from 19th century British newspapers and nearly 4,000 hours of
recordings from the Sound Archive. These digitised images will be made available via the web in 2006-07.
• Implement web archiving initiatives. On 9 May, the Library launched the first phase of the searchable archive of Websites,
developed by the UK Web Archiving Consortium. There are now over 800 sites available via http://www.webarchive.org.uk., the UK
Web Archiving Consortium site.
Strategic priority 3: Transform search and navigation
• Provide for remote ordering of books. The Library developed a remote ordering of books facility for researchers who make use of
the Library’s reading rooms and wish to place an order in advance of their visit so that the items they require will be waiting for
them when they arrive.
Strategic priority 4: Grow and manage the national collection
• Develop Additional Storage Programme. Planning permission was granted for the Library’s 260m fully automated, high density,
book storage facility, offering controlled environmental conditions compliant with BS5454:2000. Award of construction contract is
planned for June 2006. This new store will meet the storage needs of the Library until 2022 and will enable the Library to increase
the proportion of storage capacity meeting BS5454:2000 from 42% to 67%. Construction of the facility is expected to be
completed in 2008-09. This project represents the largest automated library application of its type in Europe.
• Develop Centre for Conservation On 14 April, the Library received planning permission for its Centre for Conservation from the
London Borough of Camden. The construction order was placed with Sir Robert McAlpine in July and construction commenced in
August. Occupation is planned for early 2007. This major new addition to St Pancras will be a centre of excellence bringing
together all aspects of book and sound conservation in a state-of-the-art building.
Strategic priority 5: Develop our people
• Develop Excellence in Leadership. In October 2005, the Library completed the roll-out of its two-and-a-half year programme of
courses to over 400 management staff. This course has enabled managers across the Library to improve their management styles
and leadership skills.
Strategic priority 6: Guarantee financial sustainability
• Complete first year of the Corporate Balanced Scorecard. The Library introduced a Corporate Balanced Scorecard on 1 April. This
enables senior management to obtain an improved balance of performance across different aspects of the Library’s activities; it
also allows us to measure our success in implementing the corporate strategy.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

17

BRITISH LIBRARY
Our wide ranging products and services and professional expertise continue to be acknowledged in numerous ways. Among our
achievements in 2005-06:
• Mary Canavan, Director of Human Resources, was named ‘HR Director of the Year 2005’ at the HR Excellence Awards in July 2005.
• The Library won the 2005 CIPFA/PricewaterhouseCoopers Public Reporting and Accountability Award for its Annual Report and
Accounts 2003-04 along with the Measuring Our Value and Increasing Our Value documentation produced for the Spending
Review 2004.

Personnel
Chairman
The Rt Hon Lord Eatwell
of Stratton St Margaret MA PhD

Start date

End date

01.09.01

31.08.06

30.09.99
01.01.04
20.12.02
20.01.03
26.06.02
01.02.04
17.07.03
01.04.01

29.09.06
31.12.07
19.12.06
19.01.07
25.06.06
31.01.08
16.07.07
31.03.08

01.01.04

31.12.07

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
Mrs Lynne Brindley

Members
Sir Henry Boyd-Carpenter KCVO MA
Robin S Broadhurst CBE FRICS
Professor Robert G Burgess PhD AcSS
Sheila Forbes CBE
Duncan Lewis MA
Sir Colin Lucas DPhil FRHistS
Eileen Mackay CB FRSE
Simon Olswang BA Econ,
Solicitor, Attorney at Law (California)
Dr Gareth W Roberts BSc PhD MBA FRSA

Annual Report available from: The British Library, Press and Public Relations, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB.

18

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

30.9.02

01.04.04

BRITISH MUSEUM
The British Museum aims to hold for the benefit of humanity a collection representative of world cultures and
ensure that the collection is housed in safety, conserved, curated, researched and exhibited.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

37.3
5.2
1.2
19.6
63.3
40.5
3.8
17.2
61.5

37.9
5.6
1.4
17.0
61.9
43.1
1.2
3.7
48.0

39.5
8.0
0.5
3.7
51.7
47.4
0.1
5.0
52.5

42.9
9.5
1.1
6.3
59.8
53.2
0.1
8.0
61.3

44.8
7.9
1.2
4.2
58.1
51.0
0.1
10.0
61.1

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Total visitors (millions)

4.6

4.8

4.4

4.5

4.7

Child visitors (millions)

0.90

0.94

0.86

0.90

0.94

7.7

7.6

7.6

7.8

8.0

194

202

180

190

200

186

203

183

193

200

Resources £ millions
Revenue
Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Trading company income
Other income
Total income
Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

Core Performance Indicators

Number of unique user website visits (millions)
Number of children in educational programmes (000s)
1

Number of C2DE visitors (000s)
1

From 2006-07 visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8

Key Achievements in 2005-06
Museum in London
The collections are the very heart of the Museum’s identity and purpose. They range from great works of art and archaeological
treasures to prehistoric stone tools and modern protest badges. The collection continues to grow as understanding of the world
changes. In 2005-06 a number of important additions were made, including:
• The Staffordshire Moorlands Pan, jointly with the Potteries Museum and Art Gallery Stoke on Trent and the Tullie House Museum
and Art Gallery Carlisle
• Gold Coin of Coenwulf
• Sir Thomas Lawrence’s portrait of Lady Hamilton
• A pair of Gold Chocolate Cups ca 1700
• A pair of Tanjore paintings ca 1785
The Museum has continued its long tradition of temporary exhibitions on wide-ranging subjects and themes. These allow it to
present new aspects of the world’s cultures, stimulate new research and help reinvigorate engagement with the public through the
permanent galleries. The major exhibitions and installations mounted in 2005-06 include:
• Mummy: the Inside Story
• Forgotten Empire: the World of Ancient Persia
• Samuel Palmer: Vision and Landscape
• David Milne Watercolours: Painting toward the Light
• Kabuki Heroes on the Osaka Stage 1780-1830
• Views from Africa
• Samurai to Manga: Japan across the Centuries

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

19

BRITISH MUSEUM
Africa 05 – a season of major cultural events celebrating contemporary and past cultures from across the continent, including:
• A Garden for Africa, built in the Museum’s forecourt by Ground Force
• Africa Day staged with the BBC
• Launch of the Commission for Africa
• Tree of Life sculpture made with the Transforming Arms into Tools programme, supported by Christian Aid
• Parliamentary conference on Africa organised by the British Council
The Museum hosted two Guardian lectures, on Africa and Iran.
Museum in Britain
The Museum belongs to everyone in the country. Through our Partnership UK programme the Museum is able to play a role in the
cultural life of the regions of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and in turn our partner museums have access to our
international cultural and scholarly activity. Highlights of the programme in 2005-06 include:
• Throne of Weapons: tour of more than 20 venues
• Buried Treasure: Finding our Past, tour of the UK
• Across the Board: Around the World in 18 Games, to Segedunum, Gosport, Exeter and Leicester
• Sudan: Ancient Treasures, at the Bowes Museum, County Durham
• The Mold Gold Cape, on display in Wrexham Museum
Museum in the World
Touring exhibitions and loans have enabled several million people to have access to the collection of the British Museum in their
own countries. Highlights include:
• Mummy: the Inside Story, to Houston, Mobile and Madrid
• Treasures of the British Museum, to venues in Korea
• Forgotten Empire: the World of Ancient Persia, to Barcelona
In addition to international research, fieldwork and loans, the Museum has a long history of working with and supporting museums
and other cultural institutions across the world. Examples of this work include:
• Training programme for Egyptian and Iraqi colleagues
• Kenyan curator in London preparing for an exhibition in Nairobi
• Memoranda of Agreement with Canada, China, Ethiopia, Kenya and Mozambique

20

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

BRITISH MUSEUM
Personnel
Chairman
Sir John Boyd KCMG
(Appointed Chairman on 18.06.02)

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

04.07.96

03.07.06

04.07.01

20.06.05
16.09.99
09.07.04
01.01.05
04.10.00
01.04.05
01.01.04
07.07.05
01.04.05
01.04.04
01.10.04
01.06.01
26.06.03
28.11.03
16.09.99
23.03.04
01.01.00
01.01.02
16.09.99
10.02.04
21.01.99
25.03.00

19.06.09
15.09.06
08.07.08
31.12.08
03.10.09
31.03.09
31.12.07
06.07.09
31.03.09
31.03.08
30.09.08
31.05.06
25.06.07
27.11.07
15.09.08
22.03.08
31.12.06
31.12.06
15.09.08
09.02.08
20.01.08
24.03.09

Director
Mr Neil MacGregor
Trustees
Chief Emeka Anyaoku
Mr Hasan Askari
Lord Broers
Sir Ronald Cohen
Professor Barry Cunliffe CBE
Mr Francis Finlay
Mrs Val Gooding OBE
Mr Stephen Green
Ms Bonnie Greer
Dr Olga Kennard OBE FRS
Baroness Kennedy QC
The Hon Philip Lader
Mr Richard Lambert
Mrs Edmée Leventis
Mr David Lindsell
Mr David Norgrove
Mr Tom Phillips RA
Lord Powell of Bayswater
Mr Eric Salama
Mr Vikram Seth CBE
Sir Keith Thomas
Sir John Tusa

16.09.04

02.10.05

16.09.04
01.01.05
16.09.04
21.01.04
25.03.05

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

21

CHURCHES CONSERVATION TRUST
The Churches Conservation Trust conserves and promotes those Anglican churches of greatest heritage
importance which are no longer required for regular worship. It aims to:
• conserve historic churches to the highest professional standard for present and future generations;
• increase people’s access to, understanding and enjoyment of those churches, through appropriate
adaptations, education programmes, promotion and events;
• work with local communities to revitalise its churches and through increased use, contribute to community
regeneration and social inclusion.
The Trust currently has 335 listed churches in its care, in a range of rural and urban settings across England.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

3.000
1.286
1.626
5.912

3.000
1.286
0.831
5.117

3.062
1.286
1.989
6.337

3.062
1.286
1.340
5.688

3.062
1.286
1.624
5.972

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid, DCMS
Church Commissioners
Other income1
Total income
1

Other income comprises grants from sources other than Grant-in-Aid, such as the Heritage Lottery Fund, the Listed Places of Worship Scheme, from local
authorities and charitable trusts as well as donations, bequests, endowments, investment income and income from facility fees and sales of publications.

The reduction in Other income in 2004-05 follows completion of work at Bristol, St Paul, to which the Heritage Lottery Fund
contributed £2.4m.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

92%
90%

96%
90%

90%
90%

95%
90%

95%
90%

1.26m
1.11m

1.21m
1.25m

1.25m
1.44m

1.29m
1.29m

1.33m
1.33m

343
329

489
378

500
435

450
450

465
465

6.6%
9.0%

8.7%
9.0%

9.0%
9.0%

9.0%
9.0%

9.0%
9.0%

Key Performance Indicators
Percentage of churches accessible to the public
Target
Number of Visitors to Trust churches
Target
Organised events
Target
Admin cost as a percentage of total expenditure
Target

Key Achievements in 2005
Having reviewed its entire estate, the Trust has now embarked upon a range of projects to increase community use and
involvement in its buildings. Trust staff are working with local communities to identify needs and project plans and, where
necessary, to fundraise for sensitive adaptations to allow a range of appropriate uses. During the year:
A significant growth was achieved in the use of the Trust’s churches by local communities as a result of new development activity.
Following a £3.5m restoration of the Grade 1 Georgian church of St Paul’s, Bristol, which was supported by the Heritage Lottery
Fund, and the signing of a 25-year lease, local circus training school Circomedia have successfully moved in and are running a full
programme of community events. The positive impact on this inner city area and the regeneration effects have been immediate
according to local agencies. The Trust won the Georgian Group’s award for ‘Best Re-Use of a Georgian Building’ for this project.
Major repair projects undertaken included: stonework repairs to the tower and spire of St John’s, Bristol with conservation of the
medieval statues on the south elevation of the tower, and at Itchen Stoke church, a Victorian tour-de-force, re-slating of the roof
and restoration of the roof patterning with fish tail slates.

22

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

CHURCHES CONSERVATION TRUST
We held conservation open days at Edleslborough, Evesham and Bristol for local people to visit the church sites and see repairs
in progress.
A new partnership to turn St James church in Toxteth into a multifaith centre was agreed with regeneration agency Novas Arlington,
working with local community group Liverpool Community Spirit.
A six-month secondment began of a senior marketing executive from VisitBritain, which will see the Trust leading the development
of a sector-wide historic churches marketing and tourism strategy.
An innovative ‘visit planning project’, leading to an overhaul of visitor information and signage in three counties, was completed.
This is now being rolled out across all of the Trust’s five regions.
Trustees, staff and stakeholders have conducted a strategic review during the year, resulting in a new plan for 2006-09. The Trust’s
key aims will be to:
1. conserve the buildings in our care;
2. encourage and enable community use of those buildings;
3. devolve responsibility, management and ownership where appropriate and practicable; and
4. resource what we do through partnerships, volunteers and innovative approaches.

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.07.01

30.06.07

01.07.04

Trustees
Richard Butt

01.04.99

31.03.08

Rev Canon Robert Gage
Rev Canon Bob Reiss
Jenny Baker OBE
Matthew Girt
Janet Gough
Dr Lyndon Stanton
Richard Griffiths

09.12.98
01.02.02
07.11.05
07.11.05
01.05.98
01.10.99
01.01.00

08.12.06
31.01.08
06.11.08
06.11.08
30.06.05
30.09.05
01.01.06

01.04.02
01.04.05
01.04.06
09.12.04
01.02.05

Personnel
Chairman
The Rt Hon Frank Field MP
Chief Executive
Crispin Truman

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

23

COMMISSION FOR ARCHITECTURE AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT (CABE)
CABE is the Government’s principal advisor on the design and creation of the built environment and public
spaces. CABE’s purpose is to demonstrate the ability of great architecture and design to transform people’s
quality of life. Through practical advice, public campaigns and education and skills work, we seek to raise
the aspirations, capacity and performance of everyone involved in creating and maintaining buildings and
public space.
CABE takes forward DCMS’s strategic objectives in a number of ways:
• By encouraging high quality buildings, parks and urban spaces, CABE helps to make places that work better,
that support communities and that are more attractive to residents, visitors and business.
• CABE promotes social inclusion by helping to make public buildings and services more accessible and
welcoming.
• By increasing access to built environment education, CABE seeks to increase young people’s interest and
influence over the physical world that surrounds them.
• CABE aims to initiate culture change in order that people appreciate the buildings and spaces that surround
them and are inspired to demand the best for them and get involved in shaping them for the future.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

3.53
7.35
0.56
11.44

3.53
8.00
0.40
11.93

5.69
6.65
0.30
12.64

3.69
6.40
0.30
10.39

4.69
6.40
0.30
11.39

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Cases considered by the Design Review Panel

77

97

105

89

69

% of recommendations accepted (where known)

87

86

77

75

n/a1

Projects assisted by CABE’s Enabling Panel

46

122

160

202

149

No of new projects set up by Enabling Programme

50

117

65

68

88

Resources £ millions
DCMS Grant-in-Aid
ODPM Grant
Other income
Total income

Key Performance Indicators

1

In 2003 CABE commissioned a survey of applicants to its Design Review programme. 77% of respondents altered their designs in light of CABE’s comments. 86%
of respondents described the advice given by Design Review as useful. Evaluation of the Design Review process continues on a regular basis and a full survey will be
repeated in 2006. However, we have no data available for 2005.

Key achievements in 2005
The Design Review programme advised on nearly 300 architectural schemes, including 69 cases reviewed by the Design Review
Panel. Two hundred and forty seven local authorities across England referred projects to the programme. Design Review advises
DCMS on recommendations from English Heritage for the listing of post-war listed buildings and gave advice on 47 cases. The
publication Design Reviewed 2 detailed the way in which the Design Programme works and gave recent case studies as examples for
local authorities, clients and architects planning to bring schemes before the Committee.
Enabling began the year with 90 new appointments to the Enabling Panel. The ‘Building Schools for the Future’ (BSF) stream
included hands-on advice to 17 new PFI school projects, a new RIBA Client Design Advisor accreditation scheme and the publication
of a leaflet explaining the role of a design advisor on BSF projects. Other new funding agreements were made to enable nine new
LIFT projects and children centres in 12 local education authorities, as well as continued work with the Arts Council’s ‘Grants for the
Arts Capital’ projects. More projects were set up in the housing market renewal and housing growth areas, as well as a number of
important events and publications, including the third Housing Quality Forum event in March, the ninth Design Task Group event in
October and the publication of the third in our Client Guide series Creating Successful Neighbourhoods: Lessons and actions for
housing market renewal. The Design Task Group events have proved so successful in the market renewal areas that a Growth Area
Task Group was set up and had its first meeting this year. Other best practice publications included Lewisham Primary Care Trust
Children & Young People’s Centre: Design and Innovation for Primary Health and Social Care, and Winning Housing Designs: Lessons
from an Anglo-French Housing Initiative. The Europan 8 housing design competition received 74 entries from across Europe.

24

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

COMMISSION FOR ARCHITECTURE & THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT (CABE)
Key achievements in 2005 (continued)
CABE Space enabling is directly supporting over 70 local authorities in their production of green space strategies and in improving
individual public spaces through strategic planning, design and better management. The programme is now fully engaged, alongside
the CABE enabling team, in all nine Housing Market Renewal Areas and all four Housing Growth Areas. The best practice publication
Start with the park provided guidance on the creation and care of green spaces in housing renewal and growth areas. The evidence
that good design and management, not just heavy handed security measures, are the key ingredients for safer parks was reported in
Decent parks? Decent behaviour? The ongoing Parkforce campaign encourages local authorities to pledge their commitment to
putting on-site staff in parks; over 80 authorities have already taken the pledge.
Learning and Development delivered an extensive programme during 2004 through its three programmes. The Education Foundation
continued to build its network of supporters, published education resources and supported DCMS in the establishment of Engaging
Places. The Regions team funded and supported the growing network of Architecture and Built Environment Centres, alongside a
series of initiatives piloting different approaches to working at local or sub-regional level. The Regions team also continued to
support PROJECT, an awards scheme to fund the creative engagement of artists in the built environment, public space, planning and
urban design, now in the second year of its pilot phase. The Skills team delivered a highly successful urban design summer school
and continued to provide well received urban design training to local authority members and officers, highways engineers,
housebuilders and design and historic environment champions.
Policy and Communications had a busy and productive year. The Parkforce campaign to secure on-site staff in parks during daylight
hours received 131 pledges of support from public authorities. It is the most successful CABE campaign so far, gaining major
coverage in five national newspapers, 29 regional newspapers, national broadcast coverage on BBC TV and radio, and regional
coverage on nine TV news bulletins and eight regional radio stations. The Housing Audit of the north, covering the North East, the
North West and Yorkshire and Humber, was launched in November 2005. The research, which showed that 94% of housing was
poor or average, gave fuel to our argument that the housing industry needs to raise its game on design. The launch of the report
received widespread media coverage, including slots on BBC1 news. The Prime Minister’s Better Public Building Award, now in its
fifth year, received a record 140 entries in 2005. The Jubilee Library in Brighton won from a shortlist of 15 entries.

Personnel
Chairman
John Sorrell

Start date
(if applicable)

End date

14.12.04

13.12.08

20.08.99
20.08.99
20.08.99
20.08.99
05.07.00
15.12.00
15.12.00
11.03.02
15.03.02
12.05.03
12.05.03
03.06.03
05.07.03
22.07.03
15.11.04

31.07.07
19.08.06
19.08.06
19.08.06
04.07.07
14.12.07
14.12.07
10.03.10
14.03.10
11.05.07
11.05.07
02.06.07
04.07.07
21.07.07
14.11.08

Date reappointed

Chief Executive
Dr Richard Simmons
Commissioners
Mr Paul Finch
Mr Sunand Prasad
Sir Nicholas Serota
Mr Les Sparks
Mr Dickon Robinson
Mr Brian Boylan
Mr Paul Morrell
Mr Robin Nicholson
Ms Irena Bauman
Mr Jason Prior
Mr Alan Barber
Mr Ken Shuttleworth
Ms Louisa Hutton
Mr Ben Page
Ms Anthea Case

20.08.02
20.08.02
20.08.02
20.08.02
05.07.03
15.12.03
15.12.03
11.03.06
15.03.06

Website: http://www.cabe.org.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

25

CULTURE EAST MIDLANDS (CEM)
Culture East Midlands is the Regional Cultural Consortium for the East Midlands. CEM undertakes a number
of work strands including: promoting a regional approach to culture; supporting the embedding of culture in
local authority planning and in regional strategies and plans; supporting regional cultural research; supporting
the development of national policy; promoting regional distinctiveness; and advocacy and championing
for culture.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

141,267

220,772

236,094

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds

Key Achievements in 2005
Launched consultation on a new Regional Cultural Strategy, through development of a stakeholder workshop, consultation on an
‘Issues Paper’, then drafting and launch of a consultation document The Place of Choice. Strategy will be finalised in spring 2006
when action planning will commence.
Completion of scoping for a Regional Cultural Observatory. Commitment gained from cultural sector agencies and all universities in
the East Midlands. Launch set for 2006.
Development of a culture section for East Midlands Regional Assembly’s Integrated Regional Strategy and Integrated Regional
Strategy Toolkit, and developed substantial culture content for the Urban Action Plan – a partnership programme to set priorities for
the region’s major urban conurbations.
Gained agreement from East Midlands Regional Assembly Planning Board for inclusion of ‘culture section’ in the new Regional Plan.
With key stakeholders, scoped the role of culture in the economy for inclusion in both the new Regional Economic Strategy and the
new Regional Cultural Strategy.
Developed Living Spaces: Cultural Guidance for Local Delivery Vehicles in the Milton Keynes and South Midlands growth area
document, with partners across the three regions. The document makes the case for the role of culture in sustainable communities
and the need to embed plans for culture in growth areas. The document was launched by Lord Rooker, then Chair of the InterRegional Board. Building on this work, we undertook major project development plans with key partners to support culture needsanalysis for LDVs and planners in the growth area.
Led the development of Filmpur – a unique South Asian film, video and new media agency, in partnership with EM Media and
Leicester Shire Strategic Economic Partnership.
Established a major culture in rural development programme to ensure a strategic relationship between the cultural sector and rural
regeneration agendas in the region.
Developed a consultation event on the plans for the top-tier and single tier Comprehensive Performance Assessment (CPA) ‘Culture
Block’, and a workshop event focusing on the implications for culture on the new CPA framework for the assessment of district
councils. Work undertaken in partnership with the Audit Commission, Government Office for the East Midlands and the East
Midlands Regional Local Government Association.

26

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

CULTURE EAST MIDLANDS
Personnel
Chair
Ted Cassidy

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

08.10.04

05.08.09

06.08.051

08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04

30.03.06
30.03.07
30.03.07
30.03.07
30.03.08
30.03.08
30.03.06
30.03.07
30.03.06
30.03.06
30.03.08
30.03.08

Executive Director2
Sukhy Johal
Board members
Shona Powell (Vice Chair)
Peter Shelton
John Hallsworth
Vijay Sharma
Chris Hughes
Tot Brill
Heather Broughton
Councillor Ross Willmott
Councillor Ian Croft
Canon Richard Davey
Sir Richard Fitzherbert
Wendi Jarrett

Culture East Midlands was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee on 08.10.04. All Board members were elected to the
new company on this date.
1
2

The Chair’s re-appointment took into account the term he had already served on Culture East Midland’s Board before it became a company limited by guarantee.
It is a condition of the Executive Director’s employment that he is also a Director and Board member of the company.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

27

CULTURE NORTH EAST
Culture North East, the Regional Cultural Consortium for North East England, was established in 1999.
In 2004 its role changed from advisory to executive NDPB and it was incorporated as a Limited Company.
Culture North East links up the cultural sector, coordinating joint initiatives and representing the sector’s
collective impact and interests in the region. Culture North East produces and revises the Regional Cultural
Strategy and acts as the Regional Cultural Observatory for data and research. The Consortium also explores
and encourages debate and understanding of issues of regional distinctiveness, authenticity and identity and
their relationship to quality of life.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

197,326

260,740

220,737

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds

Key Achievements in 2005
• Culture North East has worked closely with the Regional Development Agency (RDA) and Assembly to ensure a prominent role for
culture in the revised regional Economic Strategy, The Spatial Strategy and the European Framework document.
• Culture North East is researching pan-European approaches to cultural strategy and policy jointly with Durham University with
the support of the Partnership Venture Fund.
• The Consortium is working with Arts Council England North East and the other cultural agencies in the region to build on the
success of the Arts at The Strategic Centre project to expand this work to cover all of the cultural sector and also engagement with
Local Strategic Partnerships. This work, Culture at the Strategic Centre, is being jointly supported by Culture North East and Arts
Council England North East and facilitated by IDeA. The joint sectoral approach is also now being applied to other issues such as
Comprehensive Performance Assessment (CPA) and Local Area Agreements (LAAs).
• Culture North East has, with the RDA, commissioned research into the cultural and economic impacts of quality of public spaces
that will feed into the Regional Infrastructure Plan.
• Collaborative work across the sector and with those working to the Children and Young People agenda has produced a pattern of
continuing and closer working and a re-scoping of the cross-sectoral forum.
• Culture North East is working collaboratively on distinctiveness with New Writing North, Tyne and Wear Museums and Northern
Architecture.

Personnel
Chairman
Olivia Grant OBE DL

Start date

End date

08.10.04

01.12.06

08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04

01.02.07
07.12.06
07.12.06
01.02.07
07.12.06
01.02.07
07.12.06
01.02.07
01.02.07
01.02.07
07.12.06
07.12.06
07.12.06
07.12.06
07.12.06

Chief Executive
Pauline Beaumont
Board members
Prof Chris Bailey FRSA
Ann Hunter
Gordon Bates
Jane Blackburn
Prof Roy Boyne
Tim Cantle-Jones
Patrick Conway
Cllr David Faulkner OBE
Tom Harvey
Cllr Mick Henry
Winnie Lowes
Tony Pender CBE
Mark Scrimshaw
Jacqui Taylor
Julie Ward

28

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

CULTURE NORTHWEST
Culture Northwest is a thinking, networking and advocacy organisation and is the strategic voice for culture
in the North west. We work strategically through collaboration, consultation and partnership to drive forward
a vision for culture across the public, private and voluntary sectors in the North west.
Culture Northwest champions the whole spectrum of cultural and creative interests in the region, including
tourism, sport, arts, heritage, museums, libraries and archives and creative industries.
As the cultural remit is so wide we focus on specific priorities within the cultural agenda. These are:
1. Establishing the North west as an international cultural leader
2. Building citizenship through culture
3. Driving health improvement through cultural activity
4. Capacity building across the region
5. Encouraging and enhancing sub-regional partnerships across the region
6. Driving awareness of regional distinctiveness by spotlighting our recognised cultural gems
7. Maximising cultural contributions to lifelong learning
For further information on Culture Northwest log onto www.culturenorthwest.co.uk
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

207,915

200,000

223,275

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds

Key Achievements in 2005
Culture Northwest’s achievements include:
• Cross departmental and public, private and voluntary sectoral delivery. Regional Events included The Cultural Connection:
Innovation and the Knowledge Economy, launch of the Northwest Culture Observatory, publication of the Merseyside Heritage
Investment Strategy, Visitor Economy: think tank together with tourism, food & drink, retail and universities. The first national
conference of Regional Cultural Consortiums England as part of Catalyst attended by over 300 UK and European delegates. Launch
of Café RSA programme, a national pilot, in conjunction with the Royal Society of Arts (RSA). Presentation of the inaugural Lever
Prize linking the region’s largest businesses with the Arts.
• Engagement with the Heritage Tourism sector through the appointment of a Heritage Tourism Executive, and with the Sports
sector through the appointment of a Sports Network Coordinator (both are partnership posts).
• Launch of Liverpool Model in conjunction with Liverpool Culture Company, John Moores University, University of Liverpool – a
groundbreaking demonstration project, the results of which will ensure a strong legacy for Liverpool as host of Capital of Culture
in 2008.
• Three year agreement achieved on annual funding from Northwest Regional Development Agency. In addition, Culture Northwest
has established a Concordat with Government Office North West to establish joint working arrangements.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

29

CULTURE NORTHWEST LTD
Personnel details
Chairman
Loyd Grossman MBE FSA

Start date

End date

27.10.04

31.03.07

16.12.04
19.12.04
07.12.04
08.12.04
03.12.04
03.12.04
03.12.04
03.12.04
07.12.04
06.12.04
08.12.04

31.03.06
31.03.07
31.03.07
31.03.06
31.03.06
31.03.07
31.03.06
31.03.06
31.03.07
15.11.052
31.03.07

Chief Executive1
Libby Raper
Board members
Sir Philip Craven MBE
Marc Etches
Bryan Gray MBE
Charles Lauder
Kath Robinson
Lorraine Rogers
Anil Ruia
Andy Spinoza
Sue Woodward OBE
Robert Woof
Cecilia Wong BSoc.Sc, MCD, PhD, MRTPI
1
2

30

It is a condition of the Chief Executive’s employment that she is also a Director and Board member of the company
deceased

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

CULTURE SOUTH EAST
Culture South East is the Cultural Consortium for the South East region, originally set up by the DCMS.
The Regional Cultural Consortiums were established in 1999, and in 2004 they changed from advisory to
executive NDPBs and were incorporated as companies limited by guarantee. They were set up to champion
the cultural and creative interests in the region. Culture South East aims to do this by working in partnership
with the key regional and cultural stakeholders. Culture South East’s Operating Strategy defines how we aim
to add value to the work of our partners by:
• Promoting collaboration within the cultural sector.
• Highlighting the way in which culture can contribute towards the achievement of regional and local
priorities.
• Celebrating the way in which the cultural sector is enhancing quality of life in the region.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

204,862

222,758

224,242

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds

Key Achievements in 2005
Culture South East’s achievements in 2005 are illustrated using its funding agreement.
Strategic cultural planning
At the beginning of 2005 Culture South East ratified its Memorandum of Understanding with the South East England Development
Agency (SEEDA), the Government Office South East (GOSE), the Learning and Skills Council (LSC), the Regional Assembly and the
regional cultural agencies which they have all signed up to. The partners to the agreement are committed to:
• Embedding culture in the sustainable development of the region.
• Collaborative working to meet the challenges set out in the regional cultural strategy The Cultural Cornerstone.
Research and intelligence gathering
Culture South East has agreed proposals with its partners for the development of a Regional Cultural Observatory. In July it
recruited a Manager to take forward this project. The Observatory will be a resource for professionals who want to use culture to
meet regional and local priorities.
Local government
Following the Culture, Community Planning and LSP seminar in 2004, Culture South East published ‘Making Life Better’ – a guide
to integrating culture into community planning. This guide is designed to help local authority cultural policy officers and the work
of LSPs.
Culture South East in collaboration with the Government Office for the South East held numerous workshops over the autumn for
local authority cultural policy officers. The workshops were held to assist them with the Local Area Agreement (LAA) process and to
support the integration of culture into LAAs.
Embedding culture in regional strategies
Culture South East has worked in close partnership with SEEDA and the regional cultural agencies to ensure culture is embedded as
a strategic cross-cutting issue in the Regional Economic Strategy. We have also worked with the Assembly to ensure the
contribution of culture to quality of life in the region is reflected in the South East Plan.
Promoting regional distinctiveness
Culture South East has commissioned a Major Sports Events Strategy with SEEDA, Sport England South East and Tourism South East
with the aim of positioning the South East to take full advantage of opportunities arising from the 2012 Olympics.
Organisational development
Culture South East published its first Annual Report.
The growth agenda
Culture South East is represented on the MKSM Environment and Quality of Life sub-group and has contributed to its response on
the sub-regional strategy. Culture South East led the group and commissioned a consultation document ‘Living Spaces’ which gives
guidance to Local Delivery Vehicles.
SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

31

CULTURE SOUTH EAST
Culture and regeneration
Culture South East submitted a cultural response to the Regional Assembly’s Select Committee which was looking at the move to
Area Investment Frameworks (AIFs) from the Single Regeneration Budget.
Sustainable business structures
Worked with SEEDA to develop a guide to cultural social enterprise.

Personnel
Chairman
Kalwant Ajimal

Start date
(if applicable)

End date

11.10.04

03.02.07

11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
21.11.05
21.12.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
21.11.05
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04
11.10.04

31.12.07
30.06.07
30.06.07
31.12.06
30.06.07
resigned 30.09.05
30.06.07
14.02.06
30.06.07
30.06.07
30.06.04
31.12.06
05.09.07
30.06.07
30.06.07
31.12.06
resigned 14.04.05
31.12.07

Executive Director
Charles Freeman
Board members
Mary Baldwin
Dr Andrew Brown
Robert Collier
Cheryl Coppell
Yinnon Ezra
Gina Fegan
Felicity Harvest
Tessa Hilder
Sarah Hohler
Sean Holt
Helen Jackson
Linda Jasper
Neil McEvoy
Jo Nolan
Marilyn Scott
David Smith
Bill Startin
Neil Worman

32

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Date reappointed

CULTURE SOUTH WEST
Culture South West is one of eight Regional Cultural Consortiums (RCCs) set up by DCMS in 1999 to
champion culture1 within the regions. In 2004 the role of RCCs changed from advisory to executive NDPBs
and they were incorporated as companies limited by guarantee. Culture South West’s role is to provide the
main channel for representing the whole spectrum of cultural and creative interests in the South West of
England; developing and implementing a regional cultural strategy and advising key bodies including the
South West RDA and Regional Assembly on cultural issues.
1

Culture South West has adopted an inclusive definition of culture that embraces a wide variety of activities, places, values and beliefs that contribute to a sense of
identity and well being for everyone.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

205,988

211,612

221,305

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds

Key Achievements in 2005
Partnership with SWRDA
Three-year core funding (£150,000, over 2005-2008) secured from the South West RDA.
Creative Industries
South West (non-media) Creative Industries Development Strategy and associated business plans approved by the South West RDA,
resulting in an investment of £1.1m.
Research
A guide to Commissioning cultural sector research in the South West and an online database of consultants and researchers active in
the region’s cultural sector produced, research into culture and demographic ageing underway.
Promoting regional distinctiveness
5,000 copies of a fold out poster containing a fascinating array of 100 Things you didn’t know about culture in the South West
produced and distributed across the region.
Secured funding (£528,000) from the Heritage Lottery Fund to support Brunel 200 South West; a regional celebration of the 200th
anniversary of the birth of Isambard Kingdom Brunel in 2006.
Cultural sector leadership and skills development
Launched an innovative professional development programme for cultural sector leaders across the region Creating Cultural
Leadership: South West. The programme is being managed by Leadership South West (Exeter University) and Dartington College
of Arts.
South West Cultural Infrastructure Development Strategy: People, Places and Spaces
Innovative and ground breaking research commissioned and underway. This will set a regional framework for cultural activities in
terms of ‘where things go’ (built facilities) and ‘what happens where’ (initiatives and activities) through to 2026.
Collaboration with new partners
Cultural and Environmental Volunteering project commissioned and underway.
Conferences on culture and the planning system in the South West and on Local Area Agreements held as part of the ‘Culture
Works’ conference series.
Influencing regional strategies
Provided input on the draft Regional Spatial Strategy and an overview on the role of culture in the region’s economy as part of the
Regional Economic Strategy review.
Updated culture chapter in State of the South West report.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

33

CULTURE SOUTH WEST
Personnel
Chairman
Adrian Vinken

Start date

End date

13.10.04

13.10.06

13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
13.10.04
02.03.06
02.03.06
02.03.06

13.10.07
13.10.07
13.07.05
13.10.07
13.10.07
13.10.07
13.10.07
13.10.07
13.10.07
18.03.05
13.10.07
13.10.07
02.03.09
02.03.09
02.03.09

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Joint Executive Director2
Pippa Warin
Libby Grundy
Board members
Jim Clarke
Nick Capaldi
Sam Hunt
Robin Bush
Lynne Staley Brookes
Caroline Norbury
Judith Reynolds
Jeremy Payne
Edward Gillespie
Martyn Heighton
Stephen Wray
Malcolm Bell
Mark Cotton
Robert Bewley
Robert Sharpe
2

34

Pippa and Libby work on a job-share basis, both using the title Joint Executive Director. Sue Kay was Executive Director until Pippa’s appointment on 23.09.05.

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

CULTURE WEST MIDLANDS (CWM)
Culture West Midlands is the Regional Cultural Consortium for the West Midlands. The aim of CWM is: to be
the collective voice for the West Midlands cultural sector and to promote collaborative working in order to
enhance the region’s cultural offer and its contribution to quality of life.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

223,217

196,624

260,934

250,0001

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds
1

£250,000 estimated turnover is calculated as £215,000 core Grant-in-Aid from DCMS plus additional £35,000 of carry forward from financial year 2004-05.

Key Achievements in 2005
The funding agreement from DCMS focuses on: regional cultural strategic planning, research and intelligence; embedding culture in
Local Authority planning; culture in regeneration and development of the region’s distinctive cultural offer.
Specific achievements during 2005 included:
• The launch of Valuing People and Places – a new framework for action for the West Midlands cultural agencies.
• Completion of a scoping study for regional cultural research and intelligence and the implementation of key recommendations
including establishment of a cultural research group to support the work of the Regional Cultural Forum and the appointment of a
dedicated cultural research analyst, based at the West Midlands Regional Observatory and funded by Arts Council England, MLA,
Sport England and CWM.
• Completion of Changing Cultural Partnerships involving interviews with culture and leisure heads in all of the region’s Local
Authorities, using a team of interviewers drawn from the regional cultural agencies. The results of the research will form the basis
for a conference next year.
• Organised a consultation event with Local Authorities regional agencies about the Comprehensive Performance Assessment (CPA)
culture Block and the development of Regional Stakeholder performance commentaries.
• Organisation of a 25 strong cultural delegation from the West Midlands to the Brussels office of West Midlands in Europe. This
involved meetings with a number of key transnational partners and the region’s MEPs, helping to open up opportunities for
potential projects in the future.
• A review of how the cultural sector in the region is supporting the West Midlands Visitor Economy Strategy and development of
an action plan designed to encourage greater collaboration.
• Supporting the West Midlands response to the opportunities presented by the 2012 games. This included a regional conference
held at the International Children’s Games in Coventry two days after the 2012 announcement, appointment of a specialist sports
consultant to advise sub regional partners and supporting the development of regional structures in response to the lead from the
nations and regions committee.
• Submitted and presented evidence on behalf of the West Midlands cultural sector to the regional review of Equality and Diversity
practice in regional organisations. This resulted in a bid to the Home Office Connecting Communities Programme, which although
unsuccessful, has resulted in a shared commitment to a collaborative programme of work around this issue.
• The Regional Cultural Consortiums coordinated the initial assessment of bids to the Invest to Save programme aimed at improving
access to cultural opportunities. This in turn led to CWM committing to support a consolidated proposal to develop cultural input
to spatial planning.
• CWM combined with East Midlands colleagues to compile a response to The Midland Way following a consultation event.
• Culture West Midlands began operations as a fully incorporated NDPB from 1 April 2005 with a new name and visual identity.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

35

CULTURE WEST MIDLANDS
Personnel
Chair
Dr Brian Woods Scawen

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

20.01.05

05.08.09

06.08.05

20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05
20.01.05

30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
20.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.06.06

Executive Director
Tim Bryan
Board members
Professor Susan Bassnett
Anita Bhalla
Professor George Caird
Maureen Compton
Martyn Green
Sir William Lawrence
Anthony Priddis
Liz Roberts
Jonnie Turpie
Paul Udenze
Councillor Ian Ward
Dorothy Wilson

Culture West Midlands was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee on 11.10.04. All Board members were elected to the
new company at the Board Meeting of 20.01.05. End date relates to original appointment to RCC board – subject to verification.

36

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

DESIGN COUNCIL
The Design Council is the national, strategic body for design.
Its purpose is to strengthen and support the UK economy and society by inspiring and enabling the best use
of design. Its vision is that ‘UK management is the best user of design in the world, supported by the most
capable and skilled design professionals’.
Created in 1944, the Design Council is largely funded by Grant-in-Aid from the DTI. In May 2005, following
machinery of Government changes, the DCMS joined the DTI to become jointly responsible for the
organisation.
The Design Council was incorporated by Royal Charter in 1976 and is a registered charity, working in the
context of a number of regulatory documents (including the financial memorandum and management
statement). The DTI is sole Grant-in-Aid funder of the Design Council and the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry is therefore accountable to Parliament for the finances of the Design Council and the Design
Council’s work related to this funding.
Registered charity number: 272099
Principal address: 34 Bow Street, London WC2E 7DL.
Funding
The Design Council is primarily funded by Grant-in-Aid from the DTI. This provides it with venture funding by covering overheads
and research and development into new areas of work. The Design Council also generates income from a range of other sources,
including licence fees for the use of its proprietary products and methods and from clients for whom it delivers policy outcomes or
from fee income.
In 2004-05 our income was £7,627,000 of which £6,241,000 was Grant-in-Aid.

Key Achievements in 2005-06
2005-06 was a year of increased delivery and visibility for the Design Council.
Welcomed by the Chancellor in his pre-budget speech, the Design Council’s Chairman Sir George Cox published the Cox Review on
creativity in business in December, which included key recommendations on design policy. The Design Council is now driving
forward this agenda in partnership with other bodies as well as working closely with DCMS on the Creative Economy Programme.
The Design Council launched a transformational design programme for UK businesses, the first region to benefit being South Yorkshire.
Having invested £4 million over four years in the development of the programme which enables UK managers to use design in their
companies to sustain innovation and growth, three further Regional Development Agencies are in the process of signing up: One North
East, SEEDA and SWRDA, who will start delivering the programme in 2006. Around 1,000 business managers have directly benefited
from the Design Council’s programmes this year and nearly 60,000 have accessed its knowledge and information.
In November, the Design Council embarked on Designs of the time (Dott), a 10-year programme of design promotion and public
engagement. The programme, which will span the UK, aims to establish design as central to the economic and social success of our
country, with live public commissions, educational activity and design showcases. The first Dott, in 2007 will take place in North
East England, in collaboration with One North East Regional Development Agency.
The Design Council formed a strategic partnership with Creative & Cultural Skills, the new sector skills council for design. A Design
Skills Advisory Panel was established to lead on developing a workforce development plan for government, which will be published
for consultation in April 2006. Through the current programme of work, around 1,000 students and designers have benefited directly
and over 150,000 have accessed the Design Council’s knowledge and information this year.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

37

DESIGN COUNCIL
Other successes include:
• A design and business student placement scheme with STEP.
• A pilot on design in technology research with the EPSRC.
• An online tool for students to assess their learning environments, in partnership with the DfES.
• Prototyped concepts for reducing domestic energy consumption and collaboration with DEFRA on their Sustainable Design Forum.
• A co-creation approach to service design in healthcare with Kent County Council and Bolton Diabetes Networks.
• RED Director, Hilary Cottam was nominated Designer of the Year by the Design Museum and one of Davos’ 1,111 Young Global
Leaders.
• The Prince Philip Designers Prize, which the Design Council manages, went to Derek Birdsall, celebrated graphic designer.
• The Design Council website figures are up 43% on the same time last year.
For further information (including the 2004-05 Financial Statements) please visit the Design Council website:
www.designcouncil.org.uk.

Personnel
Chairman
Sir George Cox

Start date

End date

01.10.04

30.09.07

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
David Kester
Directors
Toby Scott (Planning Director)1
Jeremy Brown (Planning Director)1
Hilary Cottam (RED Director)
Richard Eisermann (Director-Design & Innovation)
Deborah Fitzgerald (Media & Communications Director)2
Ruth Hasnip (Media & Communications Director)2
Harry Rich (Design Solutions Director)
1
2

Jeremy Brown is the interim Planning Director following the departure of Toby Scott in December 2005.
Ruth Hasnip is currently on maternity leave, Deborah Fitzgerald is covering the post.

Council Members
Hamish Bryce
Bonnie Dean
Penny Egan
John Hazelwood
John Hollar
Geoff Kirk
Stuart McDonald
Paul Priestman
Jonathan Sands
Richard Williams
Christopher Wise

38

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

01.01.05
01.01.05
01.01.02
01.01.01
01.01.05
01.01.05
01.01.05
01.01.05
01.01.00
01.01.05
01.01.05

31.12.05
31.12.07
31.12.08
31.12.06
31.12.06
31.12.07
31.12.06
31.12.06
31.12.07
31.12.07
31.12.06

01.01.06
01.01.06

01.01.06

ENGLISH HERITAGE
(Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England)
English Heritage is the Government’s statutory adviser on the historic environment and is the largest source
of non-Lottery grant funding. Grants are awarded to secular historic buildings and monuments, conservation
areas, archaeology, cathedrals and other places of worship. English Heritage is also responsible for maintaining
more than 400 historic properties in the care of the state and for making them accessible to the broadest
possible public audience. To support its educational and advisory work, English Heritage carries out
programmes of technical and historical research and maintains the National Monuments Record as the
central, publicly accessible archive for the historic environment of England.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid received1

122.9

131.5

135.7

134.7

135.7

Grant-in-Aid applied to I&E – Resource1

119.6

125.3

125.2

125.3

126.3

Other income

38.5

42.5

39.4

40.1

40.7

Total income

158.1

167.8

164.6

165.4

167.0

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

Visitors (millions)2
Target
Outturn

11.8
11.8

11.8
11.9

12.0
11.9

12.1

Members (thousands)
Target
Outturn

485
485

550
542

600
595

650

>8.5
8.9

>8.5
8.9

>8.9
9.0

>9

462
489

471
425

481
452

491

Resources £ millions

1

Includes adjustments for End of Year Flexibility

Key Performance Indicators

Visitor satisfaction3 (Mark out of 10)
Target
Outturn
Free educational visits for schoolchildren (000s)
Target
Outturn
2
3

Includes estimated numbers of visits to unstaffed properties
2005-06 is actual number for visitor satisfaction

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

39

ENGLISH HERITAGE
Key Achievements in 2005-06
Following completion of a two-year modernisation programme, English Heritage published a new five-year strategy in June for the
period 2005-2010 entitled Making the Past Part of the Future. A supporting suite of nine Regional Plans which set out how the
strategy will direct services at a regional and local level was published in January.
Several milestones have been achieved this year with the Heritage Protection Review including the transfer of listing administration
from DCMS to English Heritage on 1 April and the introduction of new notification and consultation procedures. Fifteen pilot
projects have been completed and reviewed and English Heritage is working closely with DCMS to consider improvements to the
planning process and on the consultation on the principles against which sites will be assessed for inclusion on the Register of
Historic Sites and Buildings in England. Training and web-based advice has been provided through the Historic Environment Local
Management project to help Local Authorities prepare for the new system. New guidance has been published including on
managing conservation areas and on retail development in historic areas. Historic Environment Champions have also been
appointed in 153 Local Authorities (40% of the total), with training programmes underway in seven regions.
English Heritage’s first Research Strategy, entitled Discovering the Past – Shaping the Future, was launched in October. Work is
progressing well on the proposal to develop a UK wide research strategy in consultation with the UK Historic Environment Research
Group and other partners. Conservation Principles, Policies and Guidance to provide clear guidance and practical examples on all
aspects of conservation will be published later in the year.
The fourth annual state of the historic environment report, Heritage Counts 2005, was launched on behalf of the sector in
November. The report, the most comprehensive ever on the state of England’s rural historic environment, identified the principle
threats and challenges facing it and highlighted the range of social, economic and environmental benefits that engagement in
heritage can bring to people and communities.
English Heritage’s new strategy for places of worship is underway; a number of studies have begun, including the funding of
maintenance pilot projects and the churches fabric needs survey which will form the backbone of a campaign, Inspired!, to be
launched in May.
As part of the Government’s work on sustainable communities, English Heritage has contributed to strategic thinking on the
Thames Gateway through publication of Growing Places: Heritage and a Sustainable Future for the Thames Gateway and participation
in the Thames Gateway Forum in November. Capital Spaces reported English Heritage’s review of the historic environment in the
area proposed in the Olympics 2012 bid. Both were high quality assessments for areas about to undergo very significant change
and were delivered at early stages of the process to ensure the historic environment is incorporated in the planning stages.
Following the dramatic improvement in casework turnaround performance by English Heritage in 2004-05, this year has seen
further progress from 94% to 95% within target. The number of statutory cases handled was approximately 16,000, a slight
reduction on the previous year.
English Heritage’s new Learning Strategy was launched in October. The events programme for children and adult learners has been
expanded and a new programme of educational publishing established. On-site educators and workshops have been introduced at
key sites, and a new programme of educational volunteering is scheduled for November 2006. Approximately 452,000 free
educational visits were hosted this year.
A range of new outreach projects has engaged hard-to-reach learners across the country. Twenty projects included training and skills
development as a means of building capacity within community groups and two outreach projects engaged communities in the
housing market renewal process.
Participation in Heritage Open Days increased to 1 million and the Festival of History attracted 17,000 visitors. The largest single
National Archaeology Day event offering mock digs, re-enactments and activity trails, held at the English Heritage site at Fort
Cumberland, Portsmouth, attracted nearly 1,800 visitors.
The Images of England website is now the largest free image library on the internet, holding over 240,000 images of England’s
listed buildings.
This year has seen considerable investment in English Heritage properties including major projects at Osborne House, Rievaulx Abbey,
Battle Abbey, Goodrich Castle and Kenilworth Castle, and smaller projects to improve interpretation, presentation and accessibility
have been completed at a further sixteen properties. Thirteen seminars were held across the country with the National Trust and the
Disability Rights Commission to share best practice and help improve access to historic sites for those with disabilities.

40

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

ENGLISH HERITAGE
Membership has grown to 595,000 and income from it has reached £11.9 million; admissions are expected to generate £10.2 million.
English Heritage will also realise savings of more than £1.5 million as a result of a new procurement strategy launched this year.
Management standards have been recognised this year with the Resources group being awarded Investors in People accreditation;
the Legal Services department receiving Lexcel accreditation, the national standard for legal practice management; and the
Information and Communications Technology department being the first public body to achieved certification against the British
Standard for IT Service Management (BS15000).
Major preparations have also been started to relocate the English Heritage headquarters which will begin in 2006 and be completed
in phases.

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.04.00

31.03.07

01.04.05

Members
Ms Maria Adebowale
Mrs Joyce Bridges CBE
Mr Bill Bryson
Mr Michael Cairns
Prof. David Cannadine
Mr Manish Chande
Lord Douro OBE
Mrs Gilly Drummond
Mr Piers Gough CBE
Ms Jane Grenville
Mr Michael Jolly CBE
Lord Leicester
Mr Richard Morris OBE

01.09.03
01.09.03
01.09.03
20.09.00
01.10.01
01.09.03
01.09.03
01.04.02
17.05.00
14.05.01
01.10.02
21.01.02
16.07.96

31.08.07
31.08.07
31.08.07
19.09.07
29.09.09
31.08.07
31.08.07
31.03.06
16.05.07
12.05.08
30.09.06
22.01.10
15.07.05

Mr Les Sparks OBE
Ms Elizabeth Williamson

14.05.01
01.09.03

12.05.08
31.08.07

Personnel
Chairman
Sir Neil Cossons
Chief Executive
Dr Simon Thurley

20.09.03
30.09.05

17.05.03
13.05.04
23.01.06
16.07.99
16.07.02
13.05.04

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

41

FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA)
The Football Licensing Authority is charged with ensuring the implementation of government policy regarding
the safety of grounds at which designated football matches are played.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

1.1

1.1

1.1

1.3

1.3

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid

Key Achievements in 2005
The Authority
• Ensured that each local authority had audited terms of reference of its Safety Advisory Group and its checking of the club’s
structural and other certificates and steward training records against the yardstick of the FLA Guidance on safety certification.
• Achieved some progress in reducing persistent standing in seated areas in partnership with the local authorities, the football
authorities and the clubs.
• Played a major role in securing an outline agreement between Ministers that in-house football stewards should be exempted from
the licensing requirement under the Private Security Industry Act 2001.
• Provided a significant input to the development of the new training module on conflict management and the enhanced Certificate
in Event and Match Day Stewarding.
• Published a new guidance document on control rooms.
• Underwrote a successful seminar on chemical, biological, radiation and nuclear incidents at football grounds.
• Delivered keynote presentations at seminars for ground grading assessors in the football pyramid.

Personnel
Chairman
Mr Anthony J Speed

Start date

End Date

17.04.03

16.04.06

19.04.02
01.04.01
19.04.02
01.06.04
08.01.01

18.07.08
31.03.07
18.07.08
30.05.07
08.01.07

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
Mr John de Quidt
Board members
Pamela Carvell
Trevor Hobday
Dr Brian Robertson
John Woodrow
Prof Jan Wright

42

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

19.07.05
01.04.04
19.07.05
09.01.04

GAMBLING COMMISSION
The Gambling Commission was set up on 1 October 2005 under the Gambling Act 2005. It has taken over
the role previously played by the Gaming Board for Great Britain in regulating casinos, bingo, gaming
machines and lotteries. In addition, from 2007 it will have responsibility for the regulation of betting and
remote (internet etc) gambling. The Gambling Commission regulates gambling in the public interest. It does
so by keeping crime out of gambling, by ensuring that gambling is conducted fairly and openly, and by
protecting children and vulnerable people.The Commission is also responsible for advising local and central
government on issues related to gambling.
2003-04
Outturn
(restated)

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimate
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid1
Licence Fees2
Other income
Total income

4.41
–
0.18
4.59

6.20
–
0.13
6.33

9.68
–
0.01
9.69

14.22
–
0.01
14.23

5.96
9.22
0.01
15.19

Salaries and wages
Other operating costs
Transition project
Depreciation
Total expenditure

2.59
1.55
0.44
0.09
4.67

2.84
1.52
1.80
–
6.16

4.24
1.66
3.69
0.10
9.69

7.65
3.16
2.60
0.82
14.23

11.24
3.13
–
0.82
15.19

Resources £ millions

1

The Grant-in-Aid from 2003-04 onwards includes funding for the work required to prepare for and implement the provisions of the Gambling Act 2005. These
activities include the establishment of the Gambling Commission with effect from 1 October 2005, the relocation of the Commission from London to Birmingham,
and the development of the organisation necessary to implement the new regulatory structures established by the 2005 Act.
2
The licence fee income is a ‘best estimate’ at this stage, in the Commission’s planning to implement the new licensing regime in accordance with the provisions of
the Gambling Act 2005.

Key Performance Indicators
Section
Casinos
Determination of certificate of consent applications
within 12 weeks of receipt where the applicant already
holds an earlier certificate

Target %

achieved % achieved % achieved % achieved %
2002-03
2003-04
2004-05
2005-061

90

97

93

823

703

80

92

92

100

100

Certification
Issue of dealers’ certificates of approval to first time
applicants within six weeks of receipt

80

85

85

694

80

Machines
Determination of applications for new certificates
within three months

80

91

90

81

79

Determination of renewal applications before expiry date

90

772

772

89

94

Lotteries
Determination of applicants to register lottery schemes
within six weeks of receipt

90

712

97

97

100

Bingo
Determination of certificate of consent applications within
six weeks of receipt where the applicant already holds an
earlier certificate

1

Figures to December 2005
Targets not met as a result of the delays in processing criminal checks by the Criminal Records Bureau.
3
The volume of work in the section was considerably higher in 2004-05 as companies anticipated the introduction of the Gambling Act.
4
The failure to achieve the target was largely a consequence of delays in the checks through the Criminal Records Bureau and an increasing number of applicants
from other countries.
2

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

43

GAMBLING COMMISSION
Key Achievements in 2005
The Gambling Commission was established on 1 October 2005, following the successful transfer of the functions previously
undertaken by the Gaming Board for Great Britain. The Commission has begun the processes needed to enable it to take on the full
responsibilities assigned to it under the Gambling Act 2005 by 2007. This includes the recruitment of senior and other staff, the
preparation of draft consultation documents on the way it will conduct its licensing, monitoring and advisory work and the
procurement of office accommodation in Birmingham in readiness for the transfer of its headquarters from London. Meanwhile, it
continues to discharge its duties under existing gaming legislation with its work of certification, regulation and monitoring of the
gaming and lotteries industries and to play a major part in the work of the International Association of Gaming Regulators and the
Gaming Regulators European Forum.

Personnel
Chairman
Mr P Dean, CBE

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.07.98

31.12.07

01.07.01

01.08.01
01.03.99
01.01.04
01.01.04
01.01.04
01.01.04
01.01.98

31.07.09
28.02.07
31.12.07
31.12.07
31.12.07
31.12.07
31.12.05

01.08.04
01.03.02

Chief Executive
Mrs J Williams
Deputy Chief Executive
Mr T J Kavanagh, CBE
Commissioners
Mr R Penrose OBE, QPM
Mr M Steen
Mr B G Gunn, CBE, QPM
Mr W Knight
Mrs G Milburn
Mrs E Salomon
Robert Lockwood JP

44

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

01.01.01

GEFFRYE MUSEUM
The Geffrye Museum contains permanent displays of period rooms which show the development of furniture
and domestic interiors in England from 1600 to the present day. The aim of the museum is to encourage
people to learn from and enjoy the collections, buildings and gardens within its care, with particular emphasis
on the history of English domestic interiors (in line with DCMS objectives 2, 3, 4 and 6).
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Other income
Total income1

1.3
0.3
0.1
1.7

1.8
0.3
0.3
2.4

1.4
0.3
0.5
2.2

1.7
0.3
0.5
2.5

1.9
0.4
0.1
2.4

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

1.7
0.0
0.0
1.7

1.8
0.1
0.4
2.3

1.9
0.1
0.3
2.3

1.9
0.0
0.8
2.7

2.0
0.0
0.4
2.4

Resources £ millions

1

Income does not match expenditure each year as non-Grant-in-Aid income can be retained to fund future expenditure.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Total visitors (thousands)

86.5

80

76

70

85

Child visitors (thousands)

17.4

17.4

18

14

18

55

102

120

140

160

15.6

16.3

15

12

17

12

11

10

10

12

Key Performance Indicators

Number of website visits – unique users (thousands)
Number of children in organised educational
sessions (thousands)
Number of C2DE visitors aged 16 and over (thousands)2

Note: Projections for 2005-06 and 2006-07 allow for the anticipated impact of gallery closures during refurbishment works.
2

From 2006-07, NS-SEC Socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
New period room displays for the 17th and 18th centuries have been planned, ready for building works and installation during
2006. An exhibition on the English Regional Chair explored the different vernacular traditions in chair-making across the regions of
England. The exhibits were selected from the Cotton Collection of chairs, donated to the museum in 2002. The London Museums
Hub provided funds for a major exhibition, The West Indian Front Room, which featured an evocation of the rooms created by recent
immigrants from the Caribbean in the late 1960s and ’70s. Good progress has been made in transferring collections data to a new
software system which will allow more efficient collections management and the development of online access. A new book,
A History of the Geffrye Almshouses, was published, based on research undertaken during the restoration of one of the historic
almshouses. Significant acquisitions included a painting showing a middle-class family in an interior, signed by Thomas Bardwell and
dated 1736; and a silver salt with a London date mark 1580-1, part of the important silver collection formed by Sir Ernest Cassell.
The museum’s education team delivered an enhanced level of service to a wide range of users, attracting new audiences and
working closely with sectors of the local community. The museum buildings were re-roofed with traditional clay tiles.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

45

GEFFRYE MUSEUM
Personnel
Chairman
Mr Richard Hunting1
(Deputy Chairman from 26.09.95,
appointed Chairman on 01.01.00)
Director
Mr David Dewing
Trustees
Mr Frank Smith (Deputy Chairman)
(Appointed Deputy Chairman on 28.10.00)
Mr Robert Marshall-Andrews QC MP
Mr Philip Hedley CBE1
Mr Christopher Claxton Stevens
Sir William Stubbs
Ms Marina Vaizey
Ms Mary Shand1
Ms Margaret Caseley-Hayford1
Dr Tanvir Hasan
Mr Philip Robinson
Ms Philippa Glanville
1

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

26.09.95

31.12.06

27.10.98
01.01.00
01.01.03

01.11.89

24.10.08

25.10.05

01.11.89
12.03.98
28.10.97
23.02.99
01.11.89
01.11.00
01.01.01
05.03.01
14.05.02
25.10.05

24.10.08
28.02.06
20.10.06
18.10.07
18.10.07
31.10.07
31.12.07
20.10.06
18.10.07
24.10.08

25.10.05
01.03.02
21.10.03
19.10.04
19.10.04
01.11.03
01.01.04
21.10.03
19.10.04

14.01.91

Appointed by DCMS, all other Board Members appointed by the Board of Trustees

Further information is available from: The Geffrye Museum, Kingsland Road, London E2 8EA.
Website: http://www.geffrye-museum.org.uk

46

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

HERITAGE LOTTERY FUND (HLF)
The Heritage Lottery Fund gives financial help to capital and revenue projects which safeguard and improve
access to land, buildings, objects and collections of importance to the national and local heritage of the United
Kingdom. Its heritage aims are to encourage more people to be involved in and make decisions about their
heritage; to conserve and enhance the UK’s diverse heritage; and to ensure that everyone can learn about, have
access to, and enjoy their heritage. In addition, the HLF wants to bring about a more equitable spread of its
grants across the UK. Details of specific programmes are available from the Heritage Lottery Fund.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

246

266

260

227

223

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

1,715
341
304
3,500
3,400
2,153
168

2,629
358
285
4,406
4,946
1,778
127

5,814
330
319
6,385
6,200
1,500
120

2,250
290
312
2,400
2,400
1,500
120

2,000
255
306
2,400
2,400
1,500
120

Resources £ millions
Income from the National Lottery

Key Performance Indicators
Number of awards
Value of awards (£m)
Awards paid (£m)
Applications received
Applications processed
Average processing cost1
Average processing time (days)1
1

For applications processed by HLF. Some of our applications are processed on our behalf by other bodies.

Since the Lottery started, HLF has made awards to almost 18,400 projects. Over 14,600 of them had been completed by 31 March
2005. During 2004-05, over 2,900 grant applications were received by us with further ones received by organisations that process
applications on our behalf (English Heritage, the Big Lottery Fund and the Countryside Agency). This shows that our work to
encourage and facilitate more applications has been successful and it is gratifying that many of the application are from
smaller organisations.
Work on monitoring projects while grant is being paid has continued at a high level. Over the course of the year, there were on
average 3,750 live projects being monitored (up more than 7% on last year). We also continued work during 2004-05 on reviewing
the extent to which completed projects which had received their entire grant continued to comply with the contractual obligations
attached to their awards. Further work has also been done on the framework for evaluating projects and some of our programmes,
which will lead to refinements of the way in which we collect information on the impact of our grants

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

47

HERITAGE LOTTERY FUND
Personnel
Chair
Liz Forgan

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.04.01

31.03.04

01.04.04

20.08.02
07.04.00
29.07.03
10.09.00
10.09.00
01.11.00
16.02.05
16.02.05
18.02.02
01.03.05
12.07.05
22.07.02
01.01.02

19.08.05
06.04.06
28.07.06
09.09.06
09.09.06
31.10.06
15.02.08
15.02.08
17.02.08
29.02.08
11.07.08
21.07.05
31.12.07

Director
Carole Souter
Trustees
Catherine Graham-Harrison
Primrose Wilson
Mike Emmerich
Nicholas Dodd
Giles Waterfield
James Wright
Tristram Hunt
Matthew Saunders
Derek Langslow
Brian Lang
Dan Clayton Jones
Madhu Anjali
Mike Phillips

48

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

07.04.03
10.09.03
10.09.03
01.11.03

18.02.05

22.07.05
01.01.05

HORNIMAN MUSEUM AND GARDENS
The Horniman aims to use its worldwide collections and Gardens to encourage a wider appreciation of the
world, its peoples, their cultures and its environments.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Other income
Total income

3.3
0.4
0.1
3.8

3.7
0.7
0.1
4.5

3.7
0.5
1.2
5.4

3.9
0.1
0.2
4.2

4.4
0.1
0.2
4.7

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure including
2001 Lottery project
Total expenditure

3.6
0.2
0.1

4.7
0.0
0.2

4.3
0.0
1.6

3.9
0.0
0.3

4.1
0.0
0.5

3.9

4.9

5.9

4.2

4.6

Resources £ millions

Income does not match expenditure each year as non Grant-in-Aid income can be retained to fund future expenditure.
Capital expenditure includes funding for the Aquarium Project.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

272,000

303,000

280,000

280,000

280,000

150,000

150,000

155,000

160,000

Core Performance Indicators
Total visitors to Museum
Visits to Gardens only1
Child visitors to Museum

113,000

128,000

140,000

130,000

130,000

Number of website visits

47,000

109,000

270,000

275,000

280,000

Number of children in educational programmes

33,000

41,000

45,000

40,000

40,000

C2DE visits2

56,000

60,000

28,500

29,250

29,250

1
2

Electronic counting of Gardens only visitors introduced in 2004-05.
From 2006-07, visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
The Trust is delighted to report its best year ever with a total 453,000 visits to its award-winning Museum and Gardens. This
represents 303,000 museum visits and 150,000 ‘Gardens only’ visits in 2004-05.
Africa 05 provided a major focus for programming at the Horniman with a vibrant range of live music in the Gardens, school
performances, debates, textile and photographic exhibitions and outdoor film screenings. Our largest African music event attracted
some 5,500 people, 42% were from Black and minority ethnic groups, with the majority of these (35%) being of Black
African/Caribbean heritage. Funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund supported the enhanced music and education programme
surrounding our Africa 05 programme.
We progressed our aim of making our stored collections engaging and of contemporary relevance to non-traditional museum
audiences, in this case to Londoners of Caribbean Heritage with the opening of two exhibitions in October. Part of our Amazon to
Caribbean Project, these exhibitions are the public expression of two years’ work including fieldwork in Guyana and work with
Caribbean community groups in Brent, Newham, Wandsworth and Southwark. The project received major funding from the London
Museums Hub, as well as the Arts Council alongside core funding from the DCMS.
We continued to strengthen our formal partnership with the British Museum (BM), which resulted in joint working in Kenya and
Ethiopia sharing best practise in conservation and exhibition development. At a local level it provided the opportunity for a powerful
and moving debate on gun crime in London as part of the BM’s Throne of Weapons tour. We assisted the BM with the planting of
their African Garden and the plants will be used at the Horniman next year to create a more permanent African plant display

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

49

HORNIMAN MUSEUM AND GARDENS
We continue to develop the educational potential of our 16 acres of Gardens and benefited this year from a partnership with Kew
Gardens’ Culture Online project which enabled us to create a new, well interpreted Asian Plants area linked to further cultural
information on the Kew website. The Gardens once again received the coveted ‘Green flag award’ from the Civic Trust, which
provides outside validation of their excellence both in terms of community provision and horticulture.

Personnel
Chairman
Mr Timothy Hornsby
(Chairman from 16.03.04)

Start date

End date

18.07.03

15.03.08

Trustees
Dame Jocelyn Barrow DBE

08.07.96

21.09.07

Ms Kate Buchanan
Mr Stephen Bullock

20.09.04
13.03.99

19.09.06
12.09.09

Mr Robert Crawford CBE
Prof. Paul Henderson
Mr Lynton Jones
Prof. John Mack
Ms Susan Minter
Ms Clare Paterson
Ms Rosamund Sykes
Ms Eugenie Turton CB

17.09.01
10.05.04
15.12.05
21.09.98
10.02.00
15.03.04
20.09.04
21.09.02

16.09.09
19.05.08
04.12.09
20.09.06
01.10.07
14.03.08
19.09.08
22.09.07

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Director
Ms Janet Vitmayer

50

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

07.07.99
22.09.03
13.09.01
13.09.05
17.09.05

21.09.02
01.02.04

23.09.03

HORSERACE BETTING LEVY BOARD (LEVY BOARD)
The Horserace Betting Levy Board is a statutory body (established by the Betting Levy Act 1961). It operates
in accordance with the provisions of the Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Act 1963 (as amended). Its role is to
assess and collect monetary contributions from bookmakers via the levy, which it then distributes to racing
for the improvement of horseracing, breeds of horses and the advancement of veterinary science and
education. The Secretary of State appoints three of the eight Board members (including the Chairman).
The Government intends to abolish the Board and the levy system in 2009 via the Horserace Betting and
Olympic Lottery Act, which received Royal Assent in October 2004. Alternative arrangements to replace this
system are under review.
Key Achievements in 2004-05
The Levy yielded £97m in 2004-05 from bookmakers (excluding the Tote) based on gross profits on horserace betting business.
This reflects a 5% decrease on 2003-04. Prize money for the calendar year 2005 was framed within an allocation of £61m, an
increase of £6m on the 2004 allocation. The Board paid a total of £2.2m to its Breeders’ Prizes Scheme with the aim of improving
thoroughbred bloodstock in Britain. Finally the veterinary budget increased to £1.85m for the 2004/05 academic year (£1.7m for
2003-04), underlining the Board’s commitment to improving the health and welfare of horses.

Start date

End date

Personnel
Chairman (appointed by Secretary of State)
Robert Hughes CBE

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.09.98

30.09.09

01.09.01
01.09.04

Chief Executive
Rodney Brack
Tristram Ricketts

01.10.05

30.09.05

Board members (appointed by Secretary of State)
Sir John Robb
Deputy Chairman

01.01.93

30.09.06

01.01.96
01.01.99
01.01.01
01.01.03

Keith Elliott

01.08.97

30.09.06

01.08.00
01.08.03

Other members (not appointed by the Secretary of State but in statute)
Chris Deuters (Jockey Club appointee)
Greg Nichols (Jockey Club appointee)
David Thorpe (Jockey Club appointee)
Peter Jones (Ex Officio, Chairman of the Horserace Totalisator Board)
Warwick Bartlett (Ex Officio, Chairman of the Bookmakers’ Committee)
An annual report is available from the Horserace Betting Levy Board, 52 Grosvenor Gardens, London, SW1W 0AU or from their
website www.hblb.org.uk.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

51

IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM
The Imperial War Museum illustrates and records all aspects of the two World Wars and other conflicts
involving Britain or the Commonwealth since 1914. It comprises Imperial War Museum London, the
headquarters in Kennington, the Churchill Museum & Cabinet War Rooms and HMS Belfast also in London,
Imperial War Museum Duxford near Cambridge and Imperial War Museum North in Manchester.
The Museum’s aim is to provide for and encourage the study and understanding of the history of modern
conflict by means of: maximising access to the collections, both physically and electronically; programmes of
educational activities for all ages; the care, preservation and documentation of the collections; an active
acquisitions programme; a lively programme of well designed and presented displays attractive to a wide
audience; and a high quality of service to users.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid1
Operating income1
External funding
Total income

16.5
12.5
8.2
37.2

17.5
13.5
12.3
43.3

18.5
13.6
19.4
51.5

20.6
13.8
3.7
38.1

22.1
15.2
2.2
39.5

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

32.0
0.2
4.9
37.1

35.7
0.1
7.6
43.4

36.9
0.2
14.4
51.5

34.8
0.2
3.1
38.1

36.1
0.2
3.2
39.5

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

1.966

2.056

1.906

1.913

1.975

507

538

542

568

577

2.075

2.940

7.300

8.030

8.830

Children in educational programmes (000s)

262

301

275

280

289

C2DE adult visits (000s)2

490

371

563

566

576

Resources £ millions

1

Grant-in-aid allocations for free admission are included within the Grant-in-Aid data.

Core Performance Indicators
Total visits (millions)
Child visits (000s)
Website visits (millions)1

1
2

A different software is now in use for measuring web statistics and consequently data for 2005-06 does not compare to previous years.
From 2006-07, NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

The admissions and income to the Museum’s London branches have been significantly affected during 2005 by the July bombings.

Key Achievements in 2005
Successes have included:
• The opening of the new Churchill Museum at the Cabinet War Rooms, in February 2005.
• The Award by MLA of Full Accredited Status, the first national museum to be accredited under the new scheme.
• The start on site of AirSpace, a £25 million project to transform Hangar 1 at IWM Duxford to a stunning new facility telling the
story of British Aviation history, comprising exhibition and conservation space as well as education and conference facilities.
• An exciting programme of special exhibitions which included William Orpen: Politics, Sex and Death, The Children’s War and
Lawrence of Arabia: the life, the legend at IWM London; Commonwealth Navies in HMS Belfast; and Gallipoli 90 Years On and The
North at War at IWM North. In addition a new Big Picture show – a 360º audio-visual experience – was introduced at IWM North
depicting The War at Home.

52

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM
• Commemoration of the 60th anniversaries of Victory in Europe and Victory in Japan, which were marked by special events at each
of the Museum’s branches, including veterans’ reunions, specially themed Air Shows, a seminar to mark the liberation of BergenBelsen concentration camp, and participation in the Living Museum event in St James’s Park in July.
• The Their Past Your Future intergenerational education project for children and veterans, involving the organisation of
commemorative visits for schoolchildren, preparation of a touring exhibition and the digitisation of relevant items from the
Museum’s collections. This is a major project led by the Museum funded by the Big Lottery Fund and supported by DCMS, DfES
and the MoD, encouraging schools, young people and veterans to work together to explore issues such as remembrance and
commemoration.
• The launch of Your History, the provision of digital access to collections and online family history advice through interactive
workstations at IWM North.
The new Churchill Museum has been very favourably received by both press and public and has received the following accolades:
• Association for Heritage Interpretation 2005 Interpret Britain and Ireland Award
• Bronze award in the Large Visitor Attraction category of the 2005 VisitBritain Awards
• The Council of Europe Museum Prize for 2006

Personnel
Chairman
Admiral Sir Jock Slater GCB LVO DL

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

27.08.99

07.06.06

27.08.04

31.03.07

01.04.03

Director-General
Robert Crawford CBE
Trustees
HRH The Duke of Kent [President]3
Miss Kate Adie OBE
Mr Ian Andrews CBE TD3
Dame Jean Else DBE MA
Sir Robin Fearn KCMG
Mr Christopher Fisher
Professor Sir Lawrence Freedman KCMG CBE FBA
Sir Thomas Harris KBE CMG
Miss Jyoti Munsiff
Baroness Neuberger DBE
Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Squire
Lieutenant General Sir Christopher Wallace KBE
Mr Bill Woodrow RA
Mr Tom Wright
HE The Hon Richard Alston
HE Mel Cappe
HE Kamalesh Sharma
HE The Rt Hon Jonathan Hunt ONZ
HE Dr Maleeh Lodhi
HE Lindiwe Mabuza
HE Kshenuka Senewiratne
3

12.12.74
01.04.98
01.03.02
24.03.03
15.01.01
12.07.02
15.12.00
12.01.05
12.11.99
12.05.04
19.12.01
30.07.99
31.01.03
01.09.04
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio

23.03.07
14.01.11
11.07.06
14.12.09
11.01.09
11.11.08
11.05.08
18.12.09
29.07.08
30.01.07
31.08.08

15.01.06
15.12.05
12.11.04
12.05.04
19.12.05
30.07.04

Unspecified period of appointment.

Annual Report and Accounts 2004-05 available from the Assistant Secretary, Imperial War Museum, Lambeth Road,
London SE1 6HZ; or via website: http://www.iwm.org.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

53

LIVING EAST
Living East is one of eight Regional Cultural Consortiums established by the DCMS in 1999. Living East
became a non-departmental body and was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee in 2004. Our
belief is simple – that culture improves the quality of life of everyone and has a significant impact on the
social and economic prospects of the East of England. Our vision is to put culture at the heart of the life of
the region. Living East lobbies to improve the environment in which culture is delivered.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

180,640

194,620

232,655

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds

Key Achievements in 2005
Living East is the lead advocate for culture in the region. In 2005 Living East drafted a new cultural strategy for the East of England,
which was presented for consultation between December 2005 and February 2006. The final strategy will be launched in early
summer 2006. This will be key in driving the strategic cultural planning for the region over coming years.
Living East has taken a key role in the development of spatial plans for the region, drafting the culture chapter in the East of
England Plan and submitting evidence and fielding participants to the ensuing Examination in Public. Living East delivered a seminar
for local delivery vehicles with regional partners and helped produce Living Spaces – a guide to incorporating culture into the plans
for the Milton Keynes South Midlands Growth Area (produced jointly with Culture East Midlands and Culture South East).
Working with the RDA, Arts Council and Screen East, Living East developed ‘Space for Creativity’ a creative and cultural industries
development strategy for the region, which was promoted with a series of advocacy workshops in the spring of 2005. In addition
Living East helped secure changes to the Regional Economic Strategy to take account of the economic value of cultural activities.
Living East campaigned with regional partners to generate support for the London 2012 bid, including developing a PR campaign, a
visit by the bid team, developing a brochure of the region’s cultural assets and a short film (jointly with the Screen East). The
brochure was included in the IOC delegates’ pack. Following the bid’s success we continue to work with regional partners and will
lead the region’s 2012 cultural festival. Produced a regional brochure and short film to profile the region’s cultural assets – the film
was shown at the London 2012 dinner at King’s College.

54

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

LIVING EAST
Personnel
Chairman
Graham Creelman1

Start date

End date

08.10.04

08.10.12

08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04
08.10.04

08.10.12
08.10.12
19.07.05
08.10.12
08.10.12
11.05.05
08.10.12
08.10.12

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Executive Director
Jane Edwards1
Board members
Alan Blackwell1
Anthea Case1
Clare Connor1
Andrea Hill1
Anthony Hudson1
Irene MacDonald1
Prof Bob Reeve1
Mary Sanders1

Corporate Board members
Andrea Stark1, Executive Director, Arts Council England, East
Terry Turner1, Chief Executive, East of England Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
Tess Wright1, Chief Executive, East of England Tourist Board (D)
Greg Luton, Regional Director, English Heritage
Robyn Llewellyn1, Regional Manager for the East of England, Heritage Lottery Fund
Laurie Hayward1, Chief Executive, Screen East (D)
Chris Perks, Director, Sport England, East
Brian Marshall, Company Secretary
(D) Director
1

These members were reappointed when Living East was incorporated as an Executive NDPB on 8 October 2004

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

55

MILLENNIUM COMMISSION
The Millennium Commission distributes Lottery proceeds in support of projects across the UK that mark the
year 2000 and the beginning of the third millennium. The Commission provided support for capital projects
and a scheme making awards to individuals, and also supported the Millennium Experience at Greenwich and
the Millennium Festival. The Commission stopped receiving Lottery funds in August 2001 under the terms of
an Order approved by both Houses of Parliament in December 2000. In recent years the Commission enabled
the establishment of a £100m Awards endowment, ran a fund for science centre refurbishment, and provided
opportunities for children and young people to experience the performing arts. The Commission will continue
its work into 2006 overseeing the delivery of its final capital projects and protecting the legacy of the
millennium celebrations.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

6

5

4

3

0

Resources £ millions

The Commission’s sole source of income was its share of the resources available to the National Lottery distributing bodies. The
Commission ceased receiving funds from the National Lottery when its income reached £2,286.5m in July 2001, as detailed in the
Orders passed by both Houses of Parliaments in December 2000.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-061
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

167

57

10

2

0

Key Performance Indicators
Number of awards made
(excludes awards made and subsequently withdrawn)
Value of awards made
(excludes awards made subsequently withdrawn)

£45,712,866 £38,984,422

£4,768,338 £25,000,000

£0

Value of awards paid

£61,468,000 £49,341,000 £62,700,000 £22,106,000

£0

Number of applications received

60

202

9

0

0

Number of applications processed (rejected)

54

74

6

0

0

156

58

36

0

0

£101,750

£23,079

£422,222

n/a

n/a

Number of applications processed (into contract)
Simple average cost of processing each application
(to contract or rejection)2
1
2

Figures for 2005-06 are estimates based on projections and experience to December 2005.
The Commission’s work is increasingly focused on the delivery and monitoring of existing projects rather than new applications.

Performance Targets
The Government requires all non-departmental public bodies to demonstrate how effectively they have discharged the mission
which they have been set. To this effect, the Millennium Commission has agreed certain performance targets with the Government,
against which annual performance can be measured. The table below sets out all quantified targets, and their outturns, for
2004-05.

56

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

MILLENNIUM COMMISSION
2004-05
Target

2004-05
Outturn

Capital projects in contract as % of total offered grant

100%

100%

Capital projects with work commenced as % of total in contract

100%

100%

216

202

97%

96%

Millennium Experience grant paid as % of grant awarded

100%

99%

Amount of Awards grant spent as % of total available

100%

100%

Total value of Awards funds paid out as % of budget to 2005

100%

99%3

Target

Number of capital projects completed
Amount of capital projects grant spent as % of total awarded

3

These figures do not include the Awards Endowment.

Key Achievements in 2005
The year 2005 saw some of the Commission’s final grants awarded. The ReDiscover scheme offered its final grants for science
centres and museums to renew their exhibits. New grants were also made under the Urban Cultural Programme run jointly with
Arts Council England. This year has seen the completion of two grant programmes: Millennium Awards and Millennium Encore.
The Commission was also proud to see its final landmark project – the Wales Millennium Centre – opened by HM The Queen.

Overall Achievements
One million trees, eight new bridges, 100 new visitor attractions, 550 village halls and centres. 8,500 miles of paths and cycleways.
Fifty inner city regeneration projects. Two new stadia in Scotland and Wales. Almost 2000 new open green spaces. One million
books to 4,500 state schools. Over 100 miles of restored waterways. Over 30,000 Millennium Awards to individuals. 600 churches
with new bells, floodlights or facilities. Thousands of local festivals to celebrate the year 2000. The Millennium Experience at
Greenwich. Twenty new visitor centres to help us explore ourselves, our planet and beyond.

Personnel
Chair
The Rt Hon Tessa Jowell MP
Rt Hon Richard Caborn MP

Date reappointed4
(if applicable)

Start date

End date

02.07.01
01.09.02

01.09.05

n/a
n/a

17.02.94
17.02.94
17.02.94
28.01.00
31.01.00
18.04.01
11.11.02

31.12.06
01.07.05
31.12.06
31.12.06
31.12.06
31.12.06
31.12.06

01.01.03

Director
Michael O’Connor CBE
Commissioners5
Dr Heather Cooper FRAS
The Lord Glentoran CBE DL
The Lord Heseltine CH, PC
Floella Benjamin OBE
Judith Donovan CBE
Matthew D’Ancona
Rt Hon Richard Caborn MP
4
5

01.01.03
01.01.03
01.01.03
01.01.03

Commissioners were reappointed until 31.12.06.
The number of Millennium Commissioners was reduced from eight to seven by Order on 05.09.05.

Annual Report and Accounts 2004-2005 is available from the Stationery Office or download at www.millennium.gov.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

57

MUSEUM OF LONDON GROUP
Review of Development, Activities and Achievements
The Museum of London’s major submission to the Heritage Lottery Fund, seeking substantial financial support towards the
development of a new Modern London Gallery and Learning Centre at London Wall, was successful. The £10.6m grant has been
earmarked for the Museum subject to the submission of detailed designs and an expanded business plan by July 2006. The Museum
was also awarded a development grant to take the project, now named Capital City, to the next stage. The project will complete the
stories of London’s history to the present day, and will interpret the themes, events and stories of key people from multiple
perspectives and by utilising objects, oral histories, film and new media. The results are intended to be both stimulating
intellectually and visually exciting, while also enhancing visitor comfort. Development of the project has continued throughout
2005, involving the appointment of external project managers and engineers, and a review of the design, costings and timetable,
resulting in the drawing up of a comprehensive design brief and revised architectural brief. The curatorial and access and learning
teams have been engaged on working up the more detailed content.
The second year of operation at the Museum in Docklands saw a slight increase in visitor numbers over the previous year, always a
difficult result to achieve in the year following opening. Two contrasting temporary exhibitions were staged at the Museum.
Londoners at Work captured working life in London over 100 years. Drawing on the Museum’s extensive photographic collections,
the exhibition featured work practices in the docks and in offices across London. Heroes or Villains, a family-oriented exhibition
staged for the school summer holidays, and based on the Museum of London’s toy theatre collection, proved a great hit with
children.
The Sainsbury Study Centre at the Museum in Docklands opened on October 11. This important partnership with Sainsbury’s has
provided the Museum with a first class resource for researchers, with access to both the Sainsbury and the Port of London archives.
The Museum of London’s new medieval gallery opened on 26 November. Covering a thousand years of London’s past, the gallery
replaces the original one created in 1976 and is the culmination of nearly thirty years of subsequent development of our knowledge
through excavation and historical research. The gallery provides new insights into our understanding of London’s history during the
medieval period and explores London’s connections with other parts of England and with Europe.
Two notable exhibitions were also staged at London Wall following the end of the successful London Look fashion exhibition in July
2005. Black History Month was celebrated with a display of works of art depicting London by the Nigerian born artist Uzo Egonu. He
came to London in 1945 to study art and spent his entire working life in the capital as a painter, print maker and illustrator. Roots
to Reckoning opened on 1 October, featuring the work of three Jamaican-born photographers portraying black London experiences
from the 1960s to the present day.
The group’s total visitor attendance in 2004-05 was 556,545, an increase of 14% on 2003-04. The increase can be attributed to the
continuing popularity of the Museum in Docklands, the exhibitions and events programmes at London Wall, and in particular the
major temporary exhibition, London Look. Importantly, there was also an increase in the number of school students participating in
booked schools programmes. However after the July bombings, visitor figures at London Wall, which had previously been in excess
of 2004-05, fell back significantly, and this trend has continued, with the figures for December 2005 being around 25% down on
the previous December. Our data shows that the main drop in visitors is in the non-London UK visitors, which is a concern for all
London attractions.
The exhibitions programme was complemented by a series of public lectures, events and study days designed to meet the needs of
a range of audiences – scholars, enthusiasts, school groups and other students, families and children. Both London Wall and the
Museum in Docklands deliver an active programme of talks, tours, performances and activities throughout the year to meet the
needs of diverse audience segments. Archaeological sites being excavated by the Museum of London Archaeology Service (MoLAS)
across Greater London provided the opportunity for local communities and schools to access Museum programmes; open days and
community excavations took place in Camden, Hackney, Hounslow, Lambeth, Merton and Southwark. A successful community dig
at Brixton Windmill, where Museum archaeologists contributed to a project for local residents and nine local primary schools,
including one special school, is to be repeated in 2005-06.
In December 2004 MoLAS celebrated its 30th anniversary of professional archaeology by the Museum. MoLAS has been appointed
to assist in developing regional strategies on a number of projects, including Chichester harbour conservancy research framework,
the Thames Strategy East cultural heritage assessment, environmental statement work for Crossrail and the archaeology, historic
buildings and legacy bid preparation for London’s bid for the Olympic Games in 2012. Fieldwork was undertaken across Greater
London and at sites in southeast England, and international commissions were undertaken in Jordan and Kosovo.
Another major focus of work was research and publications, much of it as a result of findings from developer-funded excavations in
recent years. Including the ten volumes published in 2004-05, MoLAS has now published over 55 books, both academic and
populist, on London’s rich past. A further 80 publications are in preparation, over 30 of which are funded by English Heritage
research grants.

58

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

MUSEUM OF LONDON GROUP
The Museum has commenced a fundamental review of its approach to the management of its employees, and a comprehensive
Human Resources Strategy is now under development. It is recognised that the development and retention of a skilled,
knowledgeable, flexible and efficient workforce is essential to our success as a high performing organisation
Work has begun on the Museum’s Different but Equal programme on diversity and action is also being taken to ensure all of the
Museum’s human resources policies are designed in such a way as to embed our commitment to the development of a diverse
workforce into every aspect of our work.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Government grants
Corporation of London grant
Other operating income
Other income
Total income

6.1
4.9
5.6
1.1
17.7

6.5
4.8
6.2
3.0
20.5

6.6
4.9
6.9
1.0
19.4

7.8
5.2
6.1
3.4
22.5

8.8
5.6
6.0
4.5
24.9

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

15.6
0.1
1.0
16.7

20.6
0.1
1.0
21.7

18.3
0.1
1.0
19.4

18.0
0.1
4.4
22.5

18.0
0.1
6.8
24.9

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Total visitors

487,497

556,545

468,000

400,000

350,000

Child visitors

117,202

159,451

158,000

100,000

80,000

1,243,443

855,347

1,000,000

1,200,000

1,500,000

Number of children in organised educational
programmes both on and off site

86,027

88,230

85,600

65,000

62,000

Number of C2DE visitors2

49,383

66,116

55,000

49,000

45,000

Resources £ millions

Core Performance
Indicators1

Number of website visits

1

• Figures include the Museum in Docklands.
• Reduced numbers are forecast in 2006-07 and 2007-08 due to partial closure for the Capital City Project.
• The Museum annually aims to lend to around 75 venues in England. In the years 2003-04 and 2004-05 we had an exceptionally large number of loans but in the
year 2006-07 we are looking to return to the normal number of about 75.
• In addition to venues in England the Museum is lending extensively to venues in the rest of the UK and overseas every year.

2

From 2006-07 visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

59

MUSEUM OF LONDON GROUP
Personnel
Chairman
Mr Michael Cassidy CBE

Start date

End date

01.12.04

30.11.08

Governors
Mr Adam Afriyie
Mr Kenneth Ayers
Mr Greg Hutchings
Mr Tom Jackson
Mrs Lesley Knox
Mr Julian Malins QC

26.07.00
20.07.00
01.12.99
01.12.99
03.12.99
01.12.97

resigned 05.05.05
30.11.06
30.11.06
30.11.06
02.12.06
30.11.07

Mrs Barbara Newman CBE

01.12.94

30.11.07

Ms Diane Henry Lepart
Dr Mark Patton
Mr Patrick Roney CBE
Mr Ajab Singh
Mr Neville Walton
Mr Geoffrey Wilson OBE
Sir Michael Oliver
Mr Robert Dufton
Ms Denise Jones
Jeremy Willoughby

11.09.03
21.11.01
01.02.01
23.12.98
07.04.00
04.02.00
17.06.03
15.06.04
04.03.05
01.09.05

10.09.07
20.11.05
30.11.06
22.12.05
06.04.07
03.02.07
16.06.07
14.06.08
03.03.09
31.08.09

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Director
Jack Lohman

01.12.02
01.12.02
01.12.02
03.12.02
01.12.00
01.12.03
01.12.97
01.12.00
01.12.03

01.12.02
23.12.01
07.04.03
04.02.03

From 01.12.02 all new terms will be for four years.

Financial performance
In 2004-05 the Museum of London achieved a surplus on its unrestricted funds before transfers of £182,000, before the deduction
of £469,000 pension financing costs as required under FRS17. This resulted in a net deficit on unrestricted funds of £287,000
(2004-05 surplus of £177,000).
The 2005-06 management accounts forecast a small surplus before any adjustment for pension financing costs under FRS 17.

60

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY IN MANCHESTER
The Museum of Science & Industry in Manchester illustrates the history of industrial and social development
and scientific discovery in the Greater Manchester region, including its national and international significance.
Its principal aims are: to care for, preserve and add to its collections while encouraging the widest possible
access; and generally to promote the public’s enjoyment and understanding of science and technology.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid1
Other operating income2
Trading income
Other income3
Total income

3.3
0.4
0.5
1.4
5.6

3.5
1.0
0.6
0.4
5.5

3.7
0.5
0.5
0.5
5.2

3.9
0.6
0.6
3.5
8.6

4.1
0.6
0.7
5.5
10.9

Operating costs4
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

4.3
1.5
5.8

5.2
0.3
5.5

4.4
0.5
4.9

4.5
3.5
8.0

4.7
5.5
10.2

Resources £ millions

1

2003-04 = Revenue GIA £3,099k, Capital GIA £200k
2004-05 = Revenue GIA £3,409k, Capital GIA £100k
2005-06 = Revenue GIA £3,440k, Capital GIA £300k
2006-07 = Revenue GIA £3,584k, Capital GIA £350k
2007-08 = Revenue GIA £3,771k, Capital GIA £400k
2
2004-05 high due to the particular structure of one of the temporary exhibition contracts. Operating costs similarly high, compared to prior years.
3
Fluctuates considerably and later years somewhat speculative as depend on success in fundraising for gallery developments.
4
Excluding depreciation.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Total visitors (thousands)

382

481

438

450

465

Child visitors (thousands)

177

179

180

190

202

Number of website visits (thousands)1

192

316

350

350

380

26

66

65

66

67

153

183

98

99

100

Core Performance Indicators

Number of children in educational
programmes (thousands)2
Number of C2DE visitors required to achieve an
8% increaseby 2005-06 on the 2002-03
baseline (thousands)3
1

Unique users from 2003-04.
Includes all users from 2004-05, not just taught sessions.
3
Revised from 2005-06 to reflect adult C2DE visitors only. From 2006-07 measures adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.
2

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

61

MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY IN MANCHESTER
Key Achievements in 2005
There was a record number of visitors in the year of 481,039 (excluding conference visitors). This represents a 26% increase over
2003-04 and is 11% better than the previous record set in 2002-03.
The Museum staged three major special exhibitions:
• Blackfoot Indians
• Titanic, the artefact exhibition and
• The Mysterious Bog People
The main achievements and successes of the year have included:
• The opening of our new Community Exhibition Gallery and the staging of our first community exhibition – East Manchester Works
– in May 2004, followed by the Mancunianism Reunited exhibition – which opened in January.
• Starting to refurbish the Power Hall – the Museum’s first gallery to open – with £148k grant awarded by the DCMS/Wolfson
Foundation Museums & Galleries Improvement Fund.
• A number of events were held including a car rally to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Rolls meeting Royce in Manchester and
an event for visitors and commuters to witness the transit of Venus (the first time this could be seen from Earth since 1882).
• Over the past year we have undertaken a detailed review of all aspects of the Museum’s operations. The Senior Management
Team has been strengthened and the extensive review, combined with consultation involving staff, friends and trustees, has
resulted in a new strategic plan and a significant re-engineering of the organisation to align it with the clarified mission, vision
and goals we have defined.
Future developments:
• The completion of the HLF Final Phase project of site developments.
• Continued progress on other gallery developments e.g. Air and Space Gallery and the finalisation of the Power Hall.

Personnel
Chairman
Prof. Laurie Wood

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

15.10.00

20.10.07

21.10.04

19.11.02
14.05.03
07.04.00
25.09.02
20.12.02
02.10.02
08.12.00
17.09.04
18.11.03
07.04.00
02.10.02
01.07.04
08.04.05
24.06.05

18.11.081
13.05.06
18.09.06
15.12.08
19.12.081
15.12.08
07.12.06
retired 16.12.05
17.11.06
18.09.06
retired 16.12.05
30.06.07
07.04.08
23.06.08

19.11.05

Director
Dr Ian Griffin
Trustees
Mr David Benjamin
Mr Martin Brooks
Mr Stewart Brown
Mr Mike Dyble
Mrs Phillida Entwistle
Prof. T Hinchliffe
Mr David Johnston
Ms Liz McLeod
Prof. Robin Marshall
Mr Michael Prior
Cllr Kath Robinson
Ms Lorelly Ann Wilson
Mr Howard Seaton
Dr Michael Bailey
1

62

19.09.03
16.12.05
20.12.05
16.12.05
08.12.03

19.09.03

DCMS appointment letters say four years to 18.11.09 but this has been confirmed as incorrect as term is three years only and revised letters are to be issued.

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

MUSEUMS, LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES COUNCIL (MLA)
The MLA exists to build a successful and creative nation by putting museums, libraries and archives at the
heart of national, regional and local life. It works to improve people’s lives through access to these collections
and resources – building knowledge, supporting learning, inspiring creativity and celebrating identity.
From 1 April 2006, the MLA and the nine independent Regional Agencies it funds in substantial part, formed
the MLA Partnership, which will act as the lead strategic agency for museums, libraries and archives.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

26.7
3.0
29.7

37.9
3.7
41.6

46.2
4.9
51.1

48.9
4.0
52.9

59.9
4.0
63.9

12.4

21.0

30.0

32.0

45.0

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid1
Other income
Total income
1

Of which the Renaissance museums programme

Key Performance Indicators
Robust and useful performance indicators have been agreed for the three years 2003-04 to 2005-06 covered by Spending Review
2002. Progress against these targets during 2005-06 is set out under Key Achievements.

Key Achievements
The nine key performance indicators and targets agreed for 2003-04 to 2005-06 are:
• Increase the number of contacts between children and regional museum hubs by 25% by 2005-06 – a 22% increase was achieved
by 2004-05 and the target is expected to be achieved ahead of the March 2006 target.
• Commissioned educational activities undertaken by regional hubs in partnership with schools with pilot projects running in 200304, evaluated using impact research methodology piloted in 2002-03 and fully rolled-out from 2004-05. Projects have been
completed in all the Phase 1 Hubs with 96% of teachers reporting themselves as satisfied or better and 90% of KS2 pupils
reporting that they enjoyed the experience.
• Regional museums attract a total of 0.5m visits by new users predominantly social class C2DE and ethnic minorities by the end of
2005-06 – over 0.8m new users from these priority groups had visited by 2004-05.
• At least one nationally available and six locally available content initiatives ready and being accessed on the People’s Network by
March 2004 – Enquire, Discover and Read were launched in October 2005, all nationally available.
• Successful evaluation of Basic Skills programmes run in at least 25 ‘high need’ communities completed by March 2005 – the
Council has been working with the Department for Education and Skills and The Reading Agency to identify the most effective
mechanisms for exploiting libraries’ capacity to help achieve targets on basic skills and the Vital Link programme has been rolled
out to provide support for libraries to exploit reader development partnerships with other basic skill providers.
• Launch of the Archives Task Force’s report and the issue of implementation proposals by October 2003 – the Task Force’s report
Listening to the Past Speaking to the Future was published in March 2004 and an ambitious action plan is being pursued with key
partners.
• Adoption of the Inspiring Learning for All framework by museums, archives and libraries and the convincing qualitative evaluation
of education programmes funded by the Council in 2003-04 by March 2004 – the framework was formally launched in February
2004, has been used to assess pilot projects with schools and has been acknowledged as a model outcome measure tool by the
Audit Commission.
• The acceptance by the Sector Skills Development Agency of proposals for a culture and heritage Sector Skills Council in 2003-04 –
the Sector Skills Council was formally licensed in 2004-05.
• Completion of a Strategic Review of the Council’s baseline expenditure by March 2003 and adoption of the review
recommendations by DCMS by March 2004 – the Review was completed and reported to DCMS in November 2003; in July 2004
a new Peer Review approach was piloted at the Council; following the review the MLA Partnership has been launched, a radical and
innovative approach to delivering ‘joined-up’ national and regional policy making and service development and delivery.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

63

MUSEUMS, LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES COUNCIL (MLA)
Personnel
Chairman
Mark Wood
(Appointed Chairman on 01.12.02)

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

05.01.00

03.04.07

04.06.03

17.07.00
14.01.03
20.04.00
05.01.00
01.01.04
01.01.04
01.01.04
14.01.03
26.04.00
01.01.04
13.06.00

16.07.08
13.01.07
19.04.07
04.01.08
31.12.07
31.12.07
31.12.07
13.01.07
25.06.07
31.12.07
12.06.07

17.07.04

Chief Executive
Chris Batt
Current members
Mr David Barrie
Ms Lynne Brindley
Mr Ajay Chowdhury
Mr Loyd Grossman
Sir David Henshaw
Sir Geoffrey Holland
Mr Nicholas Kingsley
Dr Robert McKee
Mr Michael Stevenson
Ms Virginia Tandy
Mr Alan Watkin
Members whose term expired or who resigned in 2005-06
Dr Maurna Crozier
Mr Mark Jones
Mr Neil MacGregor
Mr William Macnaught

64

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

20.04.03
05.01.04

26.04.03
13.06.03

NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND THE ARTS (NESTA)
The National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts aims to support and promote talent,
innovation and creativity in these fields. It currently does this via four main funding programmes as well as
publishing research and promoting events, sponsorships and competitions:
Invention and Innovation – helping individuals, micro-businesses and small teams to develop and protect
their ideas for products, services and industrial processes, and to commercialise them.
Creative Pioneer – helping recent graduates from the creative industries with both outstanding talent and
original business ideas develop their entrepreneurial confidence and win essential business start–up funding.
Learning – helping develop and test innovative ideas and new thinking in teaching and learning, aiming to
foster creative ability in science, technology and the arts, and also encourage public knowledge and
appreciation of these fields.
Fellowship – providing exceptional people with the time, space and resources to pursue their creative goals.
Key Achievements in 2005
In the financial year 2004-05 NESTA provided awards totalling £10 million to 255 projects and people, stimulating more
applications to its programmes than ever before.
NESTA’s Invention and Innovation programme leveraged almost £10 million of extra investment into investee organisations.
Creative Pioneer programme, providing an Academy and business start-up support for art and design graduates with promising
ideas, entered its second successful year, with its model being adopted by regional partners.
A new Illuminate programme was launched, offering £1 million to galleries and museums to enhance their creativity.
The Ignite! project, designed to kindle creativity in talented 10-21 year olds, expanded into the South-West and Northern Ireland.
NESTA also promoted several competitions and sponsorships during the year, including Small/Medium/Large, Ideasmart and
Famelab, to extend its reach.
A new Nations and Regions team was set up, underlining NESTA’s commitment to engage effectively across the UK.
In November 2005, Jonathan Kestenbaum was appointed NESTA’s CEO and he is currently leading a review of NESTA’s future
strategy and focus, positioning NESTA as the foremost catalyst for innovation the UK.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

23.0
20.8

30.2
24.7

31.7
26.0

30.0
30.0

30.0
30.0

Resources £ millions
Income
Expenditure

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

65

NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND THE ARTS (NESTA)
Personnel
Chairman
Chris Powell

Start date

End date

31.10.03

30.10.07

Chief Executive
Jeremy Newton
Jonathan Kestenbaum

01.11.98
01.11.05

14.06.05

Trustees
Yasmin Anwar1
Daniel Alexander
Tom Bentley
Tracy Long
Baroness Genista McIntosh of Hudnall1
Professor William Morris
Professor Nancy Rothwell, DBE1
Graham Ross Russell
Dr Simon Singh
Sir Derek Wanless
Dr Stuart Cosgrove
Anthony Freud1
Professor Julia Goodfellow

16.11.01
30.06.99
13.07.03
15.12.03
13.07.01
28.01.04
22.01.02
26.11.01
19.06.02
01.09.00
25.10.04
18.10.04
22.12.04

16.11.05
29.06.06
12.07.07
14.12.07
13.07.05
27.01.08
21.01.06
25.11.09
18.06.06
31.08.06
24.10.08
30.11.05
21.12.08

1

66

Resigned/Retired

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

30.06.02

26.11.05
01.09.03

NATIONAL GALLERY
The Gallery houses the nation’s prime collection of European paintings from the 13th to the 19th centuries.
It includes representative collections of the French, Italian, Dutch, Flemish, German and Spanish schools,
together with some British works up to the mid-19th century.
The Gallery’s aim is to care for the Collection, to enhance it for future generations, primarily by acquisition,
and to study it, while encouraging access to the pictures for the education and enjoyment of the widest
possible public now and in the future.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Other income2
Total income1

20.4
6.5
25.4
52.3

21.3
7.1
10.3
38.7

22.0
5.7
6.6
34.3

23.9
5.8
2.0
31.7

25.6
5.9
2.0
33.5

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure2
Total expenditure1

22.0
22.2
6.6
50.8

23.5
6.4
10.0
39.9

26.1
2.0
6.2
34.3

27.1
2.0
2.6
31.7

28.2
2.0
3.3
33.5

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn
4.2
0.483
4
88
409

2006-075
Plans

2007-085
Plans

4.5
0.5175
4.25
90
443

4.8
0.552
4.5
110
477

Resources £ millions

1
2

Income does not match expenditure each year as non-Grant-in-Aid income can be retained to fund future expenditure.
Capital expenditure and related income includes the East Wing Project.

All figures are derived from the Gallery’s unaudited Management Accounts for relevant year.

Core Performance Indicators
Total visitors (millions)
Child visitors (millions)4
Number of website visits (millions)3
Number of children in educational programmes (000s)
Number of C2DE vistors4

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

4.6
0.408
3.9
104
418

4.9
0.564
5.0
105
540

3

These figures are recorded by LiveStats and will be as accurate as possible given the widespread use of caching and proxy servers.
The outturn figures given for these measures are estimated based on total visitor numbers and the latest demographic research, which was completed in
March 2004. The figures for earlier years are based on demographic research completed in 2001. From 2005-06 the target covers visits by adults from NS-SEC
socio-economic groups 5-8.
5
These estimates form part of the 2005-08 funding agreement.
4

Key Achievements in 2005
An extremely successful exhibitions programme was mounted during the year. The exhibition Caravaggio was the first significant
exhibition of the artist’s late paintings, attracting wide acclaim and about 245,000 visitors. Over the Summer, Stubbs and the Horse
assembled some of the artist’s finest paintings and most beautiful anatomical drawings to explore the social, cultural and
intellectual environment in which they were produced.
The education and outreach programmes within the Gallery continued to thrive and offered more ways in to the collection for a
diverse audience than ever before. Projects included Talking Points, an ongoing two-phased consultation process enabling young
people participating in the Gallery’s outreach programmes to exert an active influence over the programmes and services that
affect them, work with young women at Bullwood Hall Prison and Looked After Children, and a DCMS-funded project which
supports Initial Teacher Training at the Gallery.
2005 saw the completion of the final stage of the East Wing Project, following the redevelopment of the portico entrance hall and
the restoration of the magnificent 19th-century decorative ceiling by J.D. Crace in the staircase hall. Below the Portico on the
ground floor a new multimedia area, with additional access to ArtStart and a coffee bar, has been created. The scheme includes new
cloakroom and toilet facilities, the installation of air-conditioning and improved lighting.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

67

NATIONAL GALLERY
Personnel
Chairman
Mr Peter Scott

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

11.08.99

10.08.08

11.08.04

25.03.98
01.08.98
30.09.98
01.04.99
06.09.99
04.02.00
06.04.01
05.07.01
01.03.02
15.11.02
10.02.03
21.02.03
02.02.04
13.04.05
26.03.05
30.09.05

24.03.05
12.04.05
29.09.05
31.03.08
05.09.08
03.02.09
05.04.06
04.07.06
28.02.06
14.11.06
09.02.07
20.02.07
01.02.08
31.07.07
25.03.09
29.09.09

25.03.03
31.07.03
30.09.03
01.04.04
05.09.04
04.02.05

Director
Dr Charles Saumarez-Smith
Trustees
Sir Colin Southgate
Professor Dawn Ades6
Lady Hopkins
Mr Jon Snow
Mr Mark Getty
Mr Ranjit Sondhi
Professor Julia Higgins
Mr Donald Moore
Lord Kerr of Kinlochard
Mr James Fenton
Mr John Lessore
Mr Simon Burke
Lady Normanby
Mrs Victoria Barnsley6
Professor Mervyn King
Professor David Ekserdijan
6

Tate Liaison Trustees.

Annual Review available from: National Gallery Bookshop, National Gallery, Trafalgar Square, London WC2N 5DN

68

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

NATIONAL HERITAGE MEMORIAL FUND (NHMF)
The National Heritage Memorial Fund’s aim is to defend the most outstanding parts of our national heritage.
We do this by providing grants (and sometimes loans) to organisations based in the United Kingdom – mainly
so that they can buy land, buildings, works of art and other objects of outstanding interest and of importance
to the national heritage. These must be at risk or have a memorial character. The NHMF is also responsible
for the distribution of the heritage share of the proceeds from the National Lottery (see HLF table for details
of performance).
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

5.0
1.9
6.9

5.0
0.9
5.9

5.0
0.7
5.7

5.0
1.0
6.0

10.0
1.0
11.0

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other income
Total income

Key Performance Indicators
The Grant-in-Aid to the NHMF remained at £5 million, the minimum amount the Trustees believe is necessary to sustain the work
of the NHMF. As the fund is reactive, it does not set financial targets for its activity. Trustees do set objectives for careful
investment management and restricting increases in administration costs. All the objectives were met in 2005.

Key Achievements in 2005
Six awards were made in the year. The grant awards made included:
• £934,115 to the Memorial for the Women of World War II.
• £105,535 to the National Portrait Gallery for the portrait of Thomas Howard.
• £110,000 to the Beckford Tower Trust for the acquisition of the Beckford Table.
• £860,000 to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, for the purchase of the Macclesfield Psalter, whose export from the UK had
been deferred.
• £500,000 to the Victoria and Albert Museum for the conservation of furniture and tapestries belonging to the Museum and kept
at Houghton Hall, Norfolk.
• £250,000 to the Royal Academy of Music for the purchase of the ‘Viotti’ Stradivarius violin.
The award of £934,115 to establish the memorial to the part played by seven million women, in the UK and allied countries, in
World War II was seen as a fitting, if unusual and exceptional, use of NHMF. In making this award, which would help create the new
memorial in Whitehall on the very significant 60th anniversary of the ending of the conflict, NHMF recognised that this would be a
national memorial to a nation-wide contribution, rather than an association with an individual, service-arm, location or battle.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

69

NATIONAL HERITAGE MEMORIAL FUND (NHMF)

70

Start date

End date

Personnel
Chair
Liz Forgan

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.04.01

31.03.04

01.04.04

Director
Carole Souter

01.04.03

Trustees
Catherine Graham-Harrison
Primrose Wilson
Mike Emmerich
Nicholas Dodd
Giles Waterfield
James Wright
Tristram Hunt
Matthew Saunders
Derek Langslow
Brian Lang
Dan Clayton Jones
Madhu Anjali
Mike Phillips

20.08.02
07.04.00
29.07.03
10.09.00
10.09.00
01.11.00
16.02.05
16.02.05
18.02.02
01.03.05
12.07.05
22.07.02
01.01.02

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

19.08.05
06.04.06
28.07.06
09.09.06
09.09.06
31.10.06
15.02.08
15.02.08
17.02.08
29.02.08
11.07.08
21.07.05
31.12.10

07.04.03
10.09.03
10.09.03
01.11.03

18.02.05

22.07.05
01.01.05

NATIONAL LOTTERY COMMISSION
The National Lottery Commission is the statutory body created under the National Lottery Act 1998
responsible for licensing and regulating the UK National Lottery.
The principal duties of the Commission are to ensure that the National Lottery is run and promoted with all
due propriety, that the interests of every participant are protected and, subject to these duties, that it does its
best to secure that the proceeds of the National Lottery are maximised for good causes. It is also responsible
for awarding the next licence to operate the Lottery, which will start from February 2009.
Main Activities during 2005
Running a successful competition
Over the last year the Commission has been working hard to fulfil its commitment to running an open, fair and transparent
competition for the third licence. The process of extensive consultation with interested parties led to the publication of the
Statement of Main Principles (SMP) in November 2005, which marked the formal start of the competition. Through listening to the
views of key stakeholders, a series of structural changes have been made to the competition, which the Commission believes will
lead to high quality, credible bids to run a successful National Lottery.
There is a robust structure in place to deliver the competition. In April, the Project Board was established to oversee the detailed
conduct of the competition and to support Chief Executive Mark Harris, his staff and a team of specialist advisers. Chair of the
Project Board is Commissioner Robert Foster, its other members being fellow Commissioner Brian Pomeroy and the Chief Executive.
There is project management expertise from a small, dedicated internal team, which will work closely with Rothschild, the
consultants acting as lead adviser for the competition process.
The work on the competition is subject to the Gateway Review Process, developed and administered by the Office of Government
Commerce. In addition to this, to assure the Commission that the competition process is properly conducted, Cornwell
Management Consultants will provide independent reviews at key stages as the competition develops.
The Commission has been engaging actively with all those who have an interest in the competition process and has been accessible
at industry events, such as the World Lottery Association conferences. One-to-one meetings have been organised with relevant
organisations, as well as roundtable debates and a successful city breakfast briefing that was attended by a wide range of
professional advisers. July saw the summary of responses and areas for further analysis published, which built upon the detailed
discussion paper A Lottery for the Future, published in January 2005.
Improving access
The Commission has continued to regulate the National Lottery firmly but flexibly. During the first half of the year the Commission
supported the launch of National Lottery Fast Pay, which allowed consumers to purchase lottery tickets through Electronic Point of
Sale (EPOS) at Tesco stores. The Commission worked to ensure the licence, consumer protection and IT issues were fully identified
and resolved before the system was launched.
The Commission also licensed HotPicks 1 & 5 and approved a series of promotions proposed by Camelot. Licensing arrangements
were adapted to allow sales through interactive television, via mobile phones and by subscription. The National Lottery website was
developed to launch interactive versions of EuroMillions and Thunderball.
Supporting the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games
The Commission worked hard to ensure the regulatory steps necessary to enable the launch of Olympic Lottery games were in
place as soon as possible following the decision to host the 2012 Games. The Commission has overseen the launch of a range of
scratchcards and interactive games, proceeds of which will contribute to the £750 million the Lottery is committed to raise to
support the 2012 Games.
Engaging with stakeholders
Over the last year the Commission has continued to engage a wide range of its stakeholders, including faith groups, and
organisations in the regulatory and gambling sector. Quarterly newsletters were published and distributed to a growing list of
recipients, now in excess of 450, and there have been discussions with a broad range of overseas visitors regarding best practice in
Lottery regulation.
Further information on the work of the Commission can be found at www.natlotcomm.gov.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

71

NATIONAL LOTTERY COMMISSION
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

–
4.063

–
4.255

–
8.293

–
8.200

–
7.200

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

96%
95.4%
6.16

97%
95%
6.31

97%
97.8%
6.81

95%
97.5%
7

95%
97.5%
7

Resources £ millions
Income
Expenditure

Key Performance Indicators
Responding to correspondence
Payment of undisputed invoices
Total number of days of staff sickness absence

Personnel
Chairman1
Timothy Hornsby
Anne Wright

Start date

End date

16.10.04
16.10.05

15.10.05
15.10.06

Members
Timothy Hornsby
Brian Pomeroy

26.03.04
01.04.99

25.03.08
31.03.08

Harriet Spicer (term extended for one month)
Jo Valentine
Robert Foster
Anne Wright
Sarah Thane

01.04.03
17.09.02
01.04.05
01.05.05
17.09.05

30.04.05
30.09.05
31.03.10
30.04.09
16.09.09

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
Mark Harris

1

No Commissioner can chair for longer than one year at a time.

Remuneration
Annual Salary of Chairman
Annual Salary of Project Board Chairman
Members Daily Rate
2

72

16.10.03
01.04.04

£45,363
£20,560
£195 per day2

As of 1 October 2005, following an independent review of pay carried out by Incomes Data Services, the salary of the chairman was increased to £58,600, the
salary of the Project Board Chairman was raised to £33,600, and the Members Daily rate was increased to £275 per day, or £9,900 per year.

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

NATIONAL MARITIME MUSEUM
The Museum illustrates for everyone the importance of the sea, ships, time and the stars and their
relationship with people.
To achieve this mission, the Museum (incorporating the Royal Observatory and the Queen’s House) at its
historic site in Greenwich, works to safeguard, and enhance the value of its pre-eminent assets: its collections,
its expertise and its buildings. The Museum’s objectives are to spread the benefits of those assets by:
maximising access and inspiration for all its users; satisfying its stakeholders, locally, nationally and
internationally; building partnerships; effective organisation and sound financial management (in line with the
Museum’s strategic plan and DCMS objectives).
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Trading company income
Other income
Total income

14.0
2.0
1.3
1.2
18.5

15.7
1.5
1.1
3.8
22.1

15.2
1.7
1.2
5.7
23.8

17.1
1.4
1.3
6.4
26.2

18.4
2.0
1.5
5.4
27.3

Operating costs1
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure2

20.0
0.1
1.5
21.6

20.0
0.7
2.5
23.23

19.8
0.2
6.4
26.43

20.5
0.2
10.6
31.33

21.0
0.2
3.7
24.9

Resources £ millions

1

Operating costs include depreciation.
Income does not match expenditure each year as non-Grant-in-Aid income can be retained to fund future expenditure.
3
These deficits incorporate a major capital development at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich that opens to the public progressively from end 2006.
2

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

1.365
276
4.089
59.8
230

1.532
347
6.750
117
385

1.450
300
7.500
90
80

1.425
290
7.750
85
80

1.475
310
8.000
93
82

Core Performance Indicators
Total visits (millions)
Child visits (000s)
Website visits (millions)
Children in educational programmes (000s)
C2DE visits (000s)4
4

From 2006-07, visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
With 1.532 million visits and 6.750 million web visits recorded this year, revenue Grant-in-Aid per user is now at its lowest-ever
figure of £1.67. Visitor satisfaction continues very high at 99% and the Museum won the Large Visitor Attraction category at the
Visit London Awards and for the second year running, the Outstanding Customer Service award. Focus this year has been on the
Museum’s SeaBritain 2005 initiative, with over 60 national and regional partners across the UK, and on our major loan exhibition
Nelson & Napoléon. Construction work for the £15 million Time and Space project to redevelop the South Building at the Royal
Observatory and build a new 120-seat planetarium proceeds apace. Some 117,000 children participated in on-site and outreach
educational programmes and the overall number of learners was over 278,000. The Captain’s Table: Life and Dining on the Great
Ocean Liners won ‘Best Museum Publication’ at the annual Association for Cultural Enterprises conference. The Museum received
Academic Analogue status from the Arts and Humanities Research Council (eight awarded out of 20 applicants) and its conference
programme included over 300 bookings for the Nelson Lecture Series held with the Institute of Historical Research. The Museum
also supported the London Borough of Greenwich in the successful London bid for the 2012 Olympics, for which the Museum is the
site for the equestrian events.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

73

NATIONAL MARITIME MUSEUM
Personnel
Chairman
Sir David Hardy
The Rt Hon The Lord Sterling of Plaistow, GCVO, CBE
(Chairman from 20.11.05)

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

06.10.95

19.11.05

20.11.00

05.04.05

04.04.09

15.06.95
12.09.96
16.04.98
20.08.99
20.08.99
06.12.00
06.12.00
06.12.00
14.02.02
15.11.02
15.11.02
11.03.03
24.11.03
08.12.04
24.02.05
24.02.05
10.03.05
28.10.05
28.10.05

14.06.09
11.09.06
15.04.06
19.08.08
19.08.06
05.12.09
05.12.05
05.12.05
13.02.10
14.11.06

Director
Roy Clare
Trustees
HRH The Duke of York, KCVO, ADC
Victor Benjamin
Raymond Miles
Patricia Rothman
Joe Abrams, OBE
Professor Jocelyn Bell Burnell, CBE, FRS
Dr M C Faulkes
Professor W Ritchie, OBE
Professor Martin Daunton, FBA
Councillor Jagir Sekhon, OBE
Penny Haire (currently on sabbatical)
Nigel Macdonald
Jan Kopernicki
Alan Titchmarsh, MBE, VMH, DL
Gilly Drummond, DL
Sir John Guinness, CB
Admiral the Lord Boyce, GCB, OBE, DL
David Moorhouse
Dr David Quarmby, CBE

74

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

10.03.07
23.11.07
07.12.08
23.02.09
23.02.09
09.03.09
27.10.09
27.10.09

15.06.05
12.09.01
16.04.02
20.08.04
20.08.04
06.12.05

14.02.06

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY
Incorporates the Science Museum in London, the National Railway Museum (NRM) at York, Locomotion: the
NRM at Shildon, the National Museum of Photography, Film & Television (NMPFT) at Bradford and NMSI
Wroughton near Swindon.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid2
Invest to Save Funds
Reform Pot Funds
Other operating income
Trading company income
Other income
Total income1, 4

36.5
0.6
–
–
0.7
13.0
50.8

35.9
–
–
–
-0.1
12.6
48.3

36.6
–
–
–
0.1
7.4
44.1

38.0
–
0.3
––
0.8
10.2
49.3

41.1
–
–
1.2
11.4
53.7

Operating costs2, 3
Collections purchases5
Capital expenditure4, 5
Total expenditure1

39.4
0
10.2
49.6

39.0
0.0
12.8
51.8

39.0
0.1
5.5
44.6

40.0
0.1
11.2
51.3

41.4
0.1
12.2
53.7

Resources £ millions

1

Income does not match expenditure each year. Non-Grant-in-Aid income may be earlier or later than expenditure funded. Capital expenditure includes trading
activity funded over future income streams.
2
Grant-in-Aid includes £0.125m p.a. to enable the Monotype Collection owned by the NMSI to remain housed at the Type Museum in Vauxhall.
3
Income and Expenditure are increased by grant to the National Coal Mining Museum of England (NCMME) of: 2003-04 £2.4m; 2004-05 £2.7m; 2005-06 £2.5m;
2006-07 £2.5m; 2007-08 £2.7m.
4
Depreciation is excluded.
5
The transfer of the share of Blythe House (£7.2m) has been excluded from the 2003-04 figures.
6
Collection purchases which are included in Capital expenditure total: 2003-04 £3.7m, 2004-05 £4.2m.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn7

2006-07
Plans7

2007-08
Plans7

Total visitors (millions)

4.28

3.84

3.40

–

–

Child visitors (millions)

1.42

1.26

1.20

–

–

Number of website visits (millions)

6.33

8.34

8.07

–

–

Number of children in educational programmes (thousands)

352

462

480

–

–

Number of C2DE visitors required to achieve an 8%
by 2005-06 on the 2002-03 baseline (thousands)8

865

918

705

–

–

Core Performance Indicators

7

At time of publishing targets for 2006-07 and 2007-08 in the draft 2005-06 - 2007-08 Funding Agreement had not been agreed. These targets can be found in the
Museum’s 2005-06 - 2007-08 Funding Agreement online on the DCMS website at the link below:
http://www.culture.gov.uk/museums_and_galleries/Sponsored_Bodies.htm
8
This measure was a Funding Agreement core target for 2003-04 and 2004-05. Revised from 2005-06 onwards to reflect over 16 UK C2DE visitors only.
From 2006-07 indicator will measure over 16 UK visitors from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

75

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY
Key Achievements in 2005
Science Museum
As part of World Year of Physics the Science Museum launched a programme of temporary exhibitions and events celebrating the
100th anniversary of the publication of Einstein’s major discoveries. In the spring a new Antenna exhibition Nanotechnology: small
science, big deal was opened, and the Science Museum’s Dana Centre launched Meeting of Minds, a series of events looking at
developments in the field of brain science. August saw the opening of the new Ingenious exhibition Inside the Spitfire. In October the
long-awaited exhibition The Science of ... Aliens was launched and received enthusiastically by both the public and the media.
The solar panelled roof in the Museum’s revamped gallery, the Energy Hall, was named as one of the ten best green energy projects
of 2005 by the DTI. Reopened in the summer, the gallery also boasts a new display of the Museum’s iconic engines and better
visitor facilities.
The Science Museum has continued to increase its reach and access to its activities and collections through its schools and
community outreach programme, which focuses on disadvantaged areas; through its highly popular stores tours of its reserve
collections; and through its expanding online presence that provides virtual access to its collections, activities, debates and more.
National Museum of Photography, Film & Television (NMPFT)
The year 2005 saw the NMSI Trustees endorsing the NMPFT redefinition plan to launch it as the ‘National Media Museum’. The aim
is to address fast-advancing and evolving areas of media such as the internet. This re-launch is planned for 2006-07.
NMPFT also secured funding for its new £3m ‘Experience TV’ gallery, due to open in July 2006. The gallery will provide hands-on
experience of TV production, space to display 200 objects from the collections – currently not on display – and access to a public
archive of over 1,000 TV programmes.
One of the highlights of the year was the Bradford Film Festival with Jenny Agutter receiving the Lifetime Achievement Award. The
highlights also included the widely acclaimed ‘Youth TV’ project bringing together children from different cultural backgrounds to
make TV programmes: the project and the Museum’s other learning events attracted a staggering 60,000 young people to visit the
Museum.
National Railway Museum (NRM)
NRM was once again the most visited museum outside London in 2005. The target for C2DE visitors was exceeded by 40%, proving
to be one of the highest ratios for any National Museum. More than 20,000 people enjoyed the Flying Scotsman experience during
its summer programme.
The year saw fundraising completed for many of the Museum’s major projects: the overhaul of Flying Scotsman to prepare it for
another ten years’ operation and for Search Engine, the NRM’s new public-facing archive and library facility, due to open in 2007.
A major new display on the Flying Scotsman, funded by Yorkshire Forward and the Heritage Lottery Fund, will open in Easter 2006.
Locomotion: the NRM at Shildon
Locomotion established itself as a significant attraction in the Northeast in 2005: the Museum’s visitor numbers exceeded all
expectations with 210,000 in its first year. Furthermore, the Museum’s presence has led to an increase in the area’s profile and now
an innovative residential construction is being planned nearby.
NMSI Wroughton
The visitor numbers at our Wroughton site increased again, from 35,000 in 2004 to 48,000 in 2005. There was also a dramatic
increase in the number of visits – from 10,000 to 23,000 – attracted by the new cultural and educational programme.
In March NMSI Wroughton collaborated with Intel for the international launch of their new WiMax technology. The demonstration
was filmed by CNN and broadcast throughout the world.
Autumn 2005 saw the completion of a new visitor access and conservation facility within the former Engineering Building. This
project was supported by the Heritage Lottery Fund within the region and is due to be formerly opened by the Secretary of State in
Spring 2006. The first exhibition was successfully launched in November.
The National Collections Centre project and site development progressed at great pace in 2005 with an outline planning application
and three high level funding bids submitted.
During 2005 major on-site landscape works were carried out in accordance with the master plan. 48,000 native woodland trees
were planted across 30Ha of land on the northern perimeter of the site.

76

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY
Personnel
Chairman
The Rt Hon Lord Waldegrave of North Hill

Start date

End date

01.07.02

30.06.06

Director
Dr Lindsay Sharp

01.07.00

30.06.05

Acting Director
Mr Jon Tucker

01.07.05

Trustees
Prof Ann Dowling CBE FRS
Mr Martin G Smith
Dr Anne Grocock
Mr David Rayner CBE
Prof Rod Smith
Sir Ron U. Cooke
Mr Richard Haythornthwaite
Dr Simon Singh MBE
Dr Douglas Gurr
Lord Rees of Ludlow FRS
Sir William Wells
Dr Maggie Semple OBE
Prof Kathy Sykes
Mr Michael Wilson

25.08.99
25.08.99
08.03.96
28.01.97
23.04.02
06.06.02
06.06.02
12.07.02
06.06.03
06.06.03
06.06.03
10.10.03
10.10.03
13.02.04

24.08.08
24.08.08
07.03.06
27.01.06
22.04.06
05.06.06
05.06.06
11.07.06
05.06.07
05.06.07
05.06.07
09.10.07
09.10.07
12.02.08

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

25.08.04
25.08.04
08.03.01
28.01.02

An Annual Report is available from: National Museum of Science & Industry, South Kensington, London SW7 2DD. It can be seen on
the website: http://www.nmsi.ac.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

77

NATIONAL MUSEUMS LIVERPOOL
(formally National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside)
Includes the Walker, the World Museum Liverpool (formerly known as Liverpool Museum), the Merseyside
Maritime Museum, the Museum of Liverpool Life, the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Sudley House, the Conservation
Centre and HM Revenue & Customs (formerly Customs & Excise) National Museum. National Museums
Liverpool aims to use its collections and other assets to provide the best opportunities for learning and access
(in line with DCMS public service objectives). NML aims to be progressive and outward looking, exciting and
inspiring people in ways that are inclusive and challenging.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income1
Trading company income
Other income
Total income1

17.3
1.0
0.1
3.6
22.0

17.3
1.0
0.1
10.1
28.5

17.6
1.2
0.1
9.1
28.0

20.2
0.9
0.1
16.7
37.9

20.2
0.9
0.1
36.0
57.2

Operating costs
(excluding depreciation)
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure3
Total expenditure2

17.0

17.6

19.8

20.9

21.0

0.5
4.1
21.6

1.7
8.2
27.5

0.3
9.5
29.6

0.3
18.0
39.2

0.3
34.0
55.3

Resources £ millions

1

Profit-making activities were transferred to a trading company in 1992-93.
Income does not match expenditure each year as non-Grant-in-Aid income can be retained to fund future expenditure.
3
Capital expenditure includes Lottery bid aspirations and any sums set aside in anticipation of success or applied for developmental purposes.
2

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Visits (millions)1

1.52

1.54

1.6

1.7

1.8

Number of children visitors (millions)4

0.37

0.40

0.27

0.29

0.30

No of C2DE visitors (millions)5

0.40

0.42

0.43

0.45

0.51

No of children in organised educational programmes
both on-site and outreach (thousands)4

90

135

240

275

305

Website pages supplied to users (millions)

3.8

8.2

11.5

14.0

16.9

Core Performance Indicators (core targets)

4
5

Projections from 2005 onwards subject to review in light of construction affecting several venues.
From 2006-07 measures adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8

Key Achievements in 2005
The opening of World Museum Liverpool in April 2005
The refurbishment and development of Grade II* listed Liverpool Museum, creating accessible entrance, new atrium for circulation
and reception and six new galleries and attractions. In total, c.3,500sqm of galleries/attraction space.
Highest visitor figures in 20 years of 1.6 million
Slavery Remembrance Day
NML is the lead partner with Liverpool City Council and community representatives in organising the International Slavery
Remembrance Day which, every August, recognises the abolition of the slave trade.

78

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

NATIONAL MUSEUMS LIVERPOOL
First Early Years Conference organised and hosted by NML
The Early Years Conference in November 2005 was the result of an exciting collaboration between the partners of the Children First
Forum; a network consisting of Early Years, Arts, Education and Sure Start representatives from across Merseyside who together with
National Museums Liverpool (NML) and Arts Council England North West (ACE, NW) are working in partnership to create
opportunities for cultural engagement for children and early years.
Moving Here
In April 2005 an HLF funded two-year project began, exploring why people came to England over the last 200 years, and what their
experiences were and continue to be. The aim of the project for NML is to work actively with three Liverpool migrant communities,
Chinese, Somali and Yemeni, in documenting their own history, and produce online stories.
Economic Impact Study
A recent study on NML, and its impact in Liverpool and the Northwest, shows that the total expenditure of both British and
overseas visitors to NML has been calculated at around £25 million (2004-05), including money spent in surrounding businesses.
Efficiency and Effectiveness
The continued development of robust performance indicators, building on the work of the Efficiency and Effectiveness Review, and
setting of challenging but achievable targets are helping to deliver efficiency at NML. Improved effectiveness and efficiency is a
specific objective of NML and efficiency gains for 2004-05 total £248k.

Personnel
Chairman
Mr Loyd Grossman OBE

Start date

End date

21.07.03

20.07.07

01.04.04
14.05.02
01.04.01
29.01.04
01.04.01
01.02.05
01.04.02
01.02.05
24.07.03
01.02.01
20.07.01
29.07.04
01.04.01
21.01.02
19.04.04

31.03.08
13.05.06
31.03.06
28.01.08
31.03.066
31.01.09
31.03.06
30.01.09
21.07.07
31.01.06
19.07.06
28.07.08
31.03.06
20.01.061
18.04.08

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Director
Dr David Fleming OBE
Trustees
Professor Drummond Bone
Sir Neil Cossons
The Earl of Derby
Mr Bryan Gray MBE
Professor Chris Green
Professor Margaret McKeith CBE
Mr G Barrie Marsh
Professor Sarah Palmer
Mrs Alexis Redmond
Professor Gordon McGregor Reid
Mrs Gillian Reynolds MBE
Ms Lorraine Rogers
Professor John Tarn OBE
Mrs Eva Wisemark
Mr Brian Wong
6

Reappointment in process

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

79

NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY
The National Portrait Gallery houses the collection of portraits in various media of eminent persons in British
History.
The Gallery aims: to promote, through the medium of portraits, the appreciation and understanding of the
men and women who have made and are making British history and culture; and to promote the appreciation
and understanding of portraiture in all media.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Other income
Total income

5.7
4.7
0.7
11.1

6.1
5.4
0.5
12.0

6.4
6.8
0.5
13.7

6.8
6.1
0.1
13.0

7.2
5.9
0.0
13.1

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

10.2
0.7
0.9
11.8

10.5
0.7
0.1
11.3

12.4
0.7
0.3
13.4

12.0
0.7
0.2
12.9

11.9
0.7
0.3
12.9

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

1.426
71.2
2.578
33.0
114

1.469
93.0
4.543
42.7
142

1.450
75.0
6.250
40.0
70

1.550
85.0
6.500
40.0
77

1.550
100.0
6.750
42.5
80

Resources £ millions

Core Performance Indicators
Total visits (millions)
Child visits (000s)
Website visits (millions)
Children in educational programmes (000s)
C2DE visits (000s)1
1

From 2006-07, visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
2005 marked another successful year for the Gallery, with the highest visitor numbers ever to St Martin’s Place and the website.
There were also good attendances and extensive media coverage for the BP Portrait Award, The World’s Most Photographed and
SELF PORTRAIT: Renaissance to Contemporary exhibitions and important new international partnerships were developed for future
exhibitions. In the UK, the Gallery extended its national programme and created new programmes for families and young people
while increasing and broadening audiences for outreach and video-conferencing activities. In December the Gallery was awarded
‘analogue status’ by the Arts and Humanities Research Council.
Outstanding portraits entering the collection included commissioned portraits of J.K. Rowling by Stuart Pearson Wright, Alfred
Brendel by Tony Bevan and Sir Bill Morris by John Keane together with the acquisitions of The Duchess of Cleveland by Sir Peter Lely
and Roger Fry by Vanessa Bell.

80

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY
Personnel
Chairman
Sir David Scholey CBE
Professor David Cannadine FBA FRSL
(Chairman from 14.07.05)

Start date

End date

15.09.92

14.07.05

07.12.00

06.12.09

06.10.03
11.10.04
07.11.05
20.06.03
03.09.04
20.06.03
15.10.99
07.12.00
14.12.04
19.12.01
27.02.98
20.02.06
21.05.02
15.10.99
15.10.99

Ex-officio
10.10.08
06.11.09
19.06.07
02.09.08
19.06.07
14.10.08
06.12.09
Ex-officio
18.12.09
31.03.06
19.02.10
20.05.06
14.10.08
14.10.08

Date reappointed
(if applicable)
15.09.97
15.09.02
07.12.05

Chief Executive
Mr Sandy Nairne
Trustees
The Rt Hon Baroness Amos
Zeinab Badawi
Nicholas Blake QC
Professor R F Boucher, CBE, FREng
The Marchioness of Douro
Amelia Fawcett CBE
Flora Fraser
Professor Ludmilla Jordanova
Sir Nicholas Grimshaw CBE PRA
Sir Christopher Ondaatje CBE OC
Tom Phillips CBE RA
David Ross
Professor Sara Selwood
Alexandra Shulman OBE
Sir John Weston KCMG

15.10.04
07.12.05
19.12.05
27.02.02

15.10.04
15.10.04

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

81

NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM
The Natural History Museum is one of the world’s greatest resources for reference, research and information
on the natural environment, guardians of a 70 million specimen collection of living species, fossils and
minerals, a powerhouse of scientific research, an institute for inspiration and creativity that annually
welcomes over three million scientists and visitors.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Trading company income (net)
Other income
Total income

39.6
–
2.7
6.4
48.7

39.6
–
3.3
7.8
50.7

41.5
–
3.5
13.7
58.7

42.8
–
3.7
15.3
61.8

45.1
–
3.9
17.9
66.9

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

38.6
0.1
6.9
45.6

40.6
0.1
5.2
45.9

41.0
0.1
8.0
49.1

42.0
0.1
22.0
64.1

43.0
0.1
25.0
68.1

2003-041
Outturn

2004-051
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

3.1

3.3

3.0

3.21

3.35

971

1,031

870

931

971

2.7

3.1

3.265

3.450

3.625

340

271

310

320

325

120

123

115

123

128

Resources £ millions

Key Performance Indicators
Number of total visitors (millions)
Number of child visitors (thousands)
Number of unique users accessing website (millions)
Number of children in organised offsite and onsite
educational programmes (thousands)
Number of C2, D and E visitors from the UK
aged over 16 (thousands)2
1
2

Note: Some figures for 2003-04 and 2004-05 have been re-stated to account for changes in guidelines from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.
From 2006-07 this indicator will measure over 16 UK visitors from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2004-05
2004-05 was an outstanding year for the Natural History Museum. More than 3.3 million people visited South Kensington and
Tring, and more virtual visitors than ever before accessed our website. The annual Wildlife Photographer of the Year exhibition broke
its previous attendance records receiving 111,420 visitors. The summer 2004 exhibition Hair was the focus for an extensive
programme of gallery and Darwin Centre Live learning events. At the Walter Rothschild Zoological Museum at Tring, 2004-05 was
the best year on record attracting 105,000 visitors – an increase of 30% on the previous year. Numbers at Tring were boosted by
two highly successful special exhibitions, Animal Mummies of Ancient Egypt and Poo – A Natural History of the Unmentionable.
The art-science exhibitions that the Museum has mounted in recent years continued in 2004 with the successful Fabulous Beasts –
an exhibition of paintings by Mark Fairnington and photographs by Giles Revell that explored and re-invented the natural
engineering of insects. In 2004-05, nearly 50,000 children visited the Museum’s dedicated learning space Investigate which has
grown from strength to strength and allows children and families to discover the process of science through handling and observing
real specimens, encouraged by the Museum’s team of skilled Explainers. The Museum’s new learning strategy was developed and
started implementation in 2004-05 with a revitalised programme for schools. An extremely successful regional education
partnership was entered into with the Oxford University Museum of Natural History and the Hancock Museum to explore the ways
in which secondary students can be inspired and motivated to study science through to A-Level and beyond. The Museum’s learning
programme for family audiences was boosted by the introduction of our popular Explorer Backpacks and gallery characters, such as
Charles Darwin and Dorothea Bates, who patrol the galleries explaining their scientific contribution to visitors young and old.

82

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM
The Museum’s daily Darwin Centre Live sessions have proved to be a highly effective learning platform which utilises the many
skills of our scientists and conservators. Over 270 Darwin Centre Live sessions were held during 2004-05 on subjects ranging from
life on Mars to the botany of Brixton Market. The Museum continues to provide a key role in training the natural historians of the
future. Several of our scientists teach on undergraduate and postgraduate courses at universities in the UK and abroad, while many
more teach on the Museum’s own postgraduate programmes. In 2004-05 a total of 152 postgraduate students studied with the
Museum for PhDs, either hosted on the premises or with Museum scientists as supervisors. A further 21 postgraduate students
studied for the MSc in Advanced Methods in Taxonomy and Biodiversity and the MRes in Biosystematics which are provided by the
Museum in partnership with Imperial College London.
In 2004-05, comprehensive and consistent collections policies and standards were developed across the Museum. This was the first
year of the EU funded SYNTHESYS programme which brings together 20 museums and botanical gardens across Europe with the
aim of creating a ‘super infrastructure’ of 340 million specimens with common standards of collections care and improved access
for visiting scientists. The Museum has the lead role in SYNTHESYS as the programme’s coordinator. In 2004 the Museum launched
a major initiative to migrate all electronic collections databases on to a single standardised collections management system. The
Museum has also partnered with the Institute of Zoology in London and the Institute of Genetics at Nottingham University in the
Frozen Ark initiative to create a repository of genetic information and cells of endangered animals. This will increase access to the
Museum’s specimens for molecular analysis. Several new databases went online during 2004-05 including the Linnaean Plant Name
Typification Project which makes information available on all the plant names described by the Swedish biologist Carl Linnaeus
(1707-1778), inventor of the scientific system for naming plants that is still in use today.
Three significant milestones were passed in the planning for Darwin Centre Phase Two in 2004-05. In July 2004 the Heritage Lottery
Fund announced a further £5 million of funding, taking its total support to £20.5 million. In September 2004, the Museum’s Board
of Trustees gave its approval for the project to proceed to tender and appointed a subcommittee to oversee progress. In January
2005 the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea granted planning permission and listed building consent. Phase Two will be
twice the size of Phase One and will provide modern storage and research facilities for the Museum’s botany and entomology
collections.
The Museum continued to produce science of the highest quality in 2004-05 and highlights include:
• 512 peer reviewed papers were published.
• Our scientists undertook work in 70 countries around the world.
• The Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Darwin Initiative) awarded a major grant to the Museum for taxonomic
capacity-building in support of biodiversity conservation in Thailand.
• Nearly 9,000 visiting scientists were received from the UK and overseas at both South Kensington and Tring, including several
visiting under the new SYNTHESYS programme.
• Our scientists and curators dealt with more than 48,000 scientific enquiries and requests for specimen identifications from public
bodies, companies, education organisations and members of the public.
• A £220,282 grant awarded by the European Commission for EDEN (Emerging Diseases in a changing European Environment).
• The Museum’s Centre for Russian and Central Asian Mineral Studies (CERCAMS) completed a mineral resource assessment in
Afghanistan, funded by US and international government agencies to support the country’s reconstruction and development.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

83

NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM
Personnel
Chairman
Professor Sir Keith O’Nions FRS
Oliver Stocken
(Appointed Chairman on 01.01.06)

Start date

End date

01.01.03
12.02.99

31.12.05
31.12.09

06.02.04
07.02.03
12.02.99
03.02.05
01.03.97
01.01.02
06.02.04
01.05.98
01.04.99
01.01.96

05.02.08
06.02.07
05.02.08
02.02.09
28.02.06
31.12.09
05.02.08
30.04.06
31.03.08
31.12.05

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

06.02.04
01.01.06

Director
Dr Michael Dixon
Trustees
Sir William Castell LVO
Professor Dianne Edwards CBE FRS
Professor Michael Hassell CBE FRS
Ian Henderson CBE
Professor Christopher Leaver CBE FRS
Professor Jacqueline McGlade
Professor Georgina Mace OBE FRS
Dame Judith Mayhew Jonas DBE
Professor Linda Partridge CBE FRS FRSE
Sir Richard Sykes FRS

Annual Report available from: Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London, SW7 5BD
Website http://www.nhm.ac.uk

84

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

06.02.04
01.03.02

01.05.02
01.04.04
01.01.01

PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT (PLR)
The Public Lending Right Scheme provides for registered authors to receive payments in proportion to the
number of times their books are lent out by public libraries.
PLR helps DCMS achieve its wider aims for the creative economy through the financial and moral support it
provides to authors. Under the Scheme every author whose books are loaned by public libraries has an
opportunity to receive payment for the use of their work and feedback on the popularity of their books with
library users across the country. This helps authors to develop their talents further and achieve excellence in
their work. It also supports the continued flow of new literature to libraries, thus underpinning the library
community’s efforts to attract new readers and broaden access.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

7.20

7.38

7.42

7.65

7.63

2003-04

2004-05

2005-06

2006-07

2007-08

443,000

442,000

488,000

510,000

531,000

2003-04

2004-05

2005-06

2006-07

2007-08

398
6.4
4.85p
33,659

412
6.5
5.26p
34,525

401
6.6
5.57p
35, 822

393
6.8
5.57p
37,122

378
6.8
5.57p
38,422

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other is negligible for all years

Paybill Costs (£ thousands)

Key Performance Indicators
Outturn (Target)
PLR operating Costs – Office computer (£ thousands)
Money to distribute (£ millions)
Rate per loan
Registered authors

Key Achievements in 2005
We increased the rate per loan, on which payments to authors in February 2006 were based, from 5.26 pence to a record 5.57
pence. Over 18,500 writers, illustrators, editors and translators have qualified for payment; and of these, 286 will receive £6,000, the
maximum payment payable under the Scheme. During 2005 we met our running cost targets agreed with DCMS, thus freeing 89%
of the PLR Fund for payment to authors; 40% of applications (up from 25% in 2004) for PLR registration from authors were
received via our new online registration system; with DCMS we secured parliamentary approval for PLR’s payment thresholds to be
amended (minimum lowered from £5 to £1, and maximum raised from £6,000 to £6,600 with effect from 2006-07).

Personnel
Registrar
Dr James Parker, OBE
Annual Report available from Public Lending Right, Richard House, Sorbonne Close, Stockton on Tees TS17 6DA, or on the PLR
website at www.plr.uk.com

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

85

ROYAL ARMOURIES
The Royal Armouries cares for the national collection of arms and armour. It has a major museum in Leeds in
addition to its traditional base at the Tower of London and the Museum of Artillery at Fort Nelson, near
Portsmouth. The Royal Armouries promotes in the UK and worldwide the knowledge, appreciation and public
enjoyment of arms and armour, making objects available for study and research, and works to expand, care
for, preserve, document and exhibit its collections.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimate
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other income
Total income

6.3
1.3
7.6

6.9
1.5
8.4

7.4
1.6
9.0

7.8
1.8
9.6

8.5
1.8
10.3

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

7.1
0.2
0.2
7.5

7.9
0.2
0.3
8.4

8.4
0.2
0.4
9.0

8.5
0.2
0.7
9.4

9.0
0.2
0.9
10.1

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

394
155
140
79
60

433
166
157
93
80

425
165
180
100
70

430
167
200
105
75

435
170
220
110
80

Resources £ millions

Core Performance Indicators
Total visits (000s)
Child visits (000s)
Website visits (000s)
Children in educational programmes (000s)
C2DE adult visits (000s)1
1

From 2006-07, visits from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
The Royal Armouries maintained its visitor growth during 2004-05 and welcomed a total of 432,755 visitors across its three sites.
Significant within this figure was the growth of education visits. This growth was achieved through the addition of some 3,300
hours of education as a result of a gallery based enabling scheme.
On 22 May 2004 the Royal Armouries opened its fourth site in partnership with the Frazier Historical Arms Museum (FHAM) in
Louisville, Kentucky. This is the first time a UK National Museum has secured a permanent presence in the United States of America.
In its first year, the FHAM welcomed 96,023 visitors through its doors.
During the period, the Royal Armouries held two exhibitions, Hands on History at the Tower of London, and Life in Leeds held in the
Leeds Museum throughout the summer of 2004. Both exhibitions were well attended and demonstrated important practical gallery
developments in terms of display and community involvement.
Involvement in the community became more focused through the exploration of issues relating to the twin themes of power and
conflict. During the period, the Royal Armouries was awarded additional DCMS/DfES strategic commissioning funding in order to
deliver three specific Power and Conflict related projects:
• Flashpoint – a programme aimed at developing effective alternative strategies for dealing with conflict through drama for 11-14
year-old school children.
• Confronting Conflict within Schools – a programme developed and delivered in conjunction with the youth charity Leap, aimed at
identifying and resolving critical points that instigate conflict within a school environment.
• Out of the Box – a mobile gallery for school children, aimed at testing a range of hands-on exhibits within a population currently
underrepresented in the museums audience.
Many of the above achievements can be attributed to the restructuring of the Royal Armouries senior management team which
now comprises the Chief Executive, Museum Director, Commercial Director and Administration Director. This new senior team
reports with the Chief Executive on their respective operational functions to specific sub-committees of the main Board, thus
ensuring higher levels of focus and drive to developments aimed at delivering the museum’s vision.

86

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

ROYAL ARMOURIES
Personnel
Chairman
Mrs Ann Green
(Appointed Chairman 28.04.03)

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Start date

End date

10.11.98

27.04.07

10.11.01
28.04.03

26.04.00
17.07.04
04.11.04
26.03.02
01.08.01
22.01.03
01.09.04
02.12.04
19.09.05
26.09.05

25.04.07
16.07.08
03.11.08
25.03.06
31.07.07
21.01.07
31.08.08
01.12.08
18.09.09
25.09.09

26.04.03

Chief Executive
Mr Paul Evans
Members
Mr Francis Carnwath CBE
Major Gen. Sir Simon Cooper GCVO
Mrs Patricia Langham BA MEd
Mr Christopher Oakley CBE
Gen. Sir Roger Wheeler GCB CBE
Mr Bob Morton FCA
Mr John Siddall
Mr Jon Hammond Booth
Mrs Marie Stevens
Prof. Richard Holmes CBE TD JP

Triennial Report available from Royal Armouries, Armouries Drive, Leeds LS10 1LT. Website: www.royalarmouries.org

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

87

SIR JOHN SOANE’S MUSEUM
The Sir John Soane’s Museum displays the antiquities, furniture and paintings collected by the architect Sir
John Soane in the house he designed for his private residence in Lincoln’s Inn Fields. No.13 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
is kept as it was at the time of the architect’s death in 1837. The Museum aims to care for Sir John Soane’s
House and Museum and its diverse collections, designated as of pre-eminent national importance, providing
free access to them and encouraging educational benefit with particular reference to the architectural
collections and architecture generally.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Other income
Total income

2.6
1.7
0.0
4.3

0.8
0.9
0.0
1.7

1.1
0.4
0.0
1.5

1.4
1.5
0.0
2.9

1.0
0.3
0.0
1.3

Operating costs
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

3.5
0.0
3.5

1.7
0.0
1.7

1.5
0.0
1.5

2.5
0.4
2.9

1.3
0.0
1.3

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

94
6
50
1
2.6

87
2.72
55
1.5
2.65

87
2.75
60
2
2.7

87
3
100
3
3

87
3
100
3
3

Resources £ millions

Core Performance Indicators
Total visitors (thousands)
Child visitors (thousands)
Number of website visits (thousands)
Number of children in educational programmes (thousands)
Number of C2DE visitors (000s)1
1

From 2006-07 visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
The Museum held the following three exhibitions during the year Wright to Gehry: Drawings from the Collection of Barbara Pine;
The Regency Country House: an exhibition of photographs from the Country Life Picture Library; Pistrucci’s Capriccio: A Rediscovered
Masterpiece of Regency Sculpture. The Museum’s paintings by William Hogarth remained on exhibition when emergency structural
works necessitated the closure of Soane’s Picture Room. The Museum’s exhibition William West and the Regency Toy Theatre was
exhibited at four regional venues in England, supported by the Heritage Lottery Fund. The Three Courtyards restoration project,
supported by the Heritage Lottery Fund, and the emergency structural repairs were completed.

88

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

SIR JOHN SOANE’S MUSEUM
Personnel
Chairman
Mr R Griffiths2
(Appointed Chairman on 02.10.97)

Start date

End date

01.11.93

30.10.11

22.03.04
19.01.94
31.01.96
22.02.05
21.01.03
01.01.99
30.10.99
25.02.99

21.03.09
11.05.16
02.12.07
21.02.10
20.01.08
09.01.18
29.10.09
19.03.31

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Director
Mr T Knox
Trustees
Dr T Bliss FRS
Mrs B Cherry OBE2
Mr D Coombs
Alderman A Gowman
Dr I Jenkins FSA
Mr S Jervis FSA2
Sir R MacCormac CBE
J Studzinski KSG2
2

03.12.02

Life Trustees retire at age 75; the other Trustees are appointed for renewable five-year terms.

Annual Report available from Sir John Soane’s Museum, 13 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3BP.
Website: www.soane.org

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

89

SPORT ENGLAND
Another year of progress and achievement in sport
During 2005-06 Sport England celebrated 10 years as a distributor of lottery funding and passed the landmark of £2 billion of
lottery investment in sport across England. Our lottery and Grant-in-Aid investment has made a huge contribution to improving
and enhancing sports provision in local communities across the country, has supported sports’ governing bodies and has helped
build our sporting infrastructure through projects such as the Manchester Commonwealth Games and the new Wembley Stadium.
September 2005 saw a clarification of our role within the wider sporting landscape focusing our efforts on community sport and
talent development, ensuring that further efficiency improvements are made in the way we deliver our services and placing a
greater emphasis on regional delivery.
More people playing sport
Establishing a clear and coherent delivery system for sport has been a key priority. Our nine Regional Sports Boards have worked
collaboratively to nurture a national network of County Sports Partnerships (CSPs) which themselves are supporting us to create
more local Community Sports Networks (CSNs) to deliver sport at a local level.
This system engages a wide range of stakeholders and is starting to ensure that resources are delivered according to the sporting
needs and priorities of local communities giving sport both a bottom up and top down delivery system. By investing carefully in the
capacity of this system we are beginning to make inroads into our key targets around increases in participation with a focus on
priority groups.
Clubs, coaches and volunteers
The Delivery System for Sport focuses on delivering sport into local communities through interventions in clubs, coaches and
volunteers, Some of our achievements in this field are:
• 4,587 accredited clubs within the PESSCL Club Links programme.
• 480 awards and almost £38m made under the Community Club Development Programme (CCDP).
• Significant progress towards achieving the target of 3,000 professional coaches across England by 2006.
• 60,000 young people in Sports Leadership Awards in its first two years.
• 1,500 sports festivals across England involving over 170,000 people.
• 4,000 16-19 year-olds engaged in community volunteering and supported the development of volunteering strategies across 17
national governing bodies and the 45 County Sports Partnerships.
Measuring our success
A number of instruments have been developed to drive improvement and measure performance. The most significant is the Active
People survey which captures crucial performance data at local authority level. This will enable us to set targets, measure progress
and identify successes and failures. This data collection work has been largely responsible for ensuring that sport and culture is
appropriately recognised in the Audit Commission’s proposal for the Comprehensive Performance Assessment (CPA) of local
authorities.
Combined with our self-assessment tools, our support for a single professional institute, our Active Places database and our work to
ensure we have a coherent set of performance indicators aligned across the entire sector we are providing a strong lead, with DCMS
support, to drive improvement and focus effort on key priorities.
Increasing success
Sport England has agreed four-year funding commitments with the governing bodies of its 31 priority and development sports
totalling some £315 million. Start, stay and succeed targets have been agreed for all NGBs against a portfolio of KPIs on
participation, coaching, volunteers, clubs, club membership, and performance, as well as NGB governance and efficiency.
The £4 million per year Talented Athlete Scholarship Scheme (TASS and TASS 2012) has been implemented in partnership with
SportsAid and other partners coordinated by Sport England.
Major projects
The ‘topping out’ celebration for the Wembley Arch took place in September with the Prime Minister Tony Blair and England Captain
David Beckham. The magnificent arch represents another iconic landmark on the London skyline. The Stadium has also played a
prominent role in respect of the successful 2012 Olympic games bid in which Sport England played an active part.
In addition to work to establish the feasibility/viability of an Olympic Aquatics Centre and Olympic Velodrome, Sport England has
played a full and active roll in a number of Olympic legacy forums and were authors of the community sport legacy strategy, a
document that formed the basis of the legacy section of the London 2012 candidature file. We are continuing to play our part in
the development of Olympic Plans using our experience and skills in this area.

90

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

SPORT ENGLAND
Other achievements during the year included the completion of the EIS network, the near completion of the Redgrave Pincent
rowing lake at Caversham, the re-development of Bisham Abbey, a long-term funding agreement with the Mountain Training Trust
at the Plas-y-Brenin National Centre in Snowdonia and an agreement for Greenwich Leisure Limited to operate Crystal Palace
National Sports Centre for the next five years.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

34.6
3.7
1.6
0
0
0
1.8
0.3
0.1
2.5
–
–
–
–
9.8
54.4

34.6
3.7
20
4.5
3.8
2.8
7.6
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
9.3
86.3

34.4
3.7
20
4.5
4
3
14.1
–
–
–
0.3
0
0
4.9
8.5
97.4

33.6
3.7
20
4.5
4
0
14.1
–
–
–
0.1
14.5
21
4.9
8.5
128.9

33.6
3.7
20
4.5
4
0
14.1
–
–
–
0.1
20
21
4.9
8.5
134.4

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

5.4
6
21
11
1.6
1.3
46.3

6.8
3.2
40.7
10
15
1.3
77.0

6.8
3.2
49.6
8
20
1.3
88.9

6.8
3.2
81.1
8
20
1.3
120.4

6.8
3.2
86.6
8
20
1.3
125.9

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Sportsmatch
Community Club Dev Program
Club & Talent Development
Step Into Sport
Sports Bursaries & Scholarships
Coaching Task Force
School Club Links
NASD
Reform Money
Competition Managers
National Sports Foundation
Football Foundation
Depreciation & Cost of Capital
Other income
Total income

Analysis of Grant-in-Aid
£ millions
Salary costs
Other running costs
Current grants to other bodies
Other current expenditure
Capital grants to other bodies
Capital expenditure
Total Grant-in-Aid

Personnel
Chairman
Lord Carter of Coles

Start date

End date

27.11.02

26.11.06

25.10.99
29.10.99
10.07.03
21.03.05
21.03.05
01.01.06
01.01.06

24.10.05
28.10.05
09.07.06
20.03.09
20.03.09
21.12.08
31.12.08

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
Roger Draper1
Board members
David Geldart
David Ross
Sir Andrew Foster
Karen Brady
Michael Farrar
Ashia Hansen
Dr Jack Rowell OBE
Tim Cantle-Jones2
Mary McAnally2
Andy Worthington MBE2
1
2

25.10.02
29.10.02

Sport England’s Director of Sport, Stephen Baddeley, has been appointed interim Chief Executive and Accounting Officer.
The chairs of the nine Regional Sports Boards serve on a rotational basis on the main Sport England Board, with at least three chairs serving at a time, for a
minimum of nine months. The four Regional Sports Board chairs listed above served on the main Sport England Board during 2005-06. It is likely that a further
rotation of Regional Sports Chairs on the main Sport England Board will take place from May 2006.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

91

TATE
Tate houses the national collection of British art from 1500 and the national collection of international
modern and contemporary art from 1900. Tate is a family of galleries and comprises Tate Britain at Millbank
and Tate Modern at Bankside in London, Tate Liverpool, and Tate St Ives.
The aim of Tate is: to increase public awareness, understanding and appreciation of British art from the 16th
century to the present day and of modern and contemporary art from around the world; to broaden the
social and geographic composition of its audiences; to develop external partnerships and demonstrate
leadership in key fields; and to maximise the value, role and potential of its collections through acquisition,
display, conservation and research.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Trading company income
Other income
Total income1

30.3
14.4
2.7
6.4
53.8

29.9
15.0
3.5
10.3
58.7

31.8
16.6
4.8
2.3
55.5

34.0
15.0
4.2
2.3
55.5

35.9
15.0
4.1
2.3
57.3

Operating costs
Collections purchases
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

45.1
4.0
1.4
50.5

43.4
4.8
3.7
51.9

48.8
4.3
2.0
55.1

48.0
3.8
3.3
55.1

49.1
3.8
4.3
57.2

Resources £ millions

1

Income does not match expenditure each year as capital fundraising can be retained for future capital expenditure.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

6.2
839
3.4
222
633

6.3
870
5.5
278
753

6.0
840
6.0
220
619

6.0
840
7.0
220
619

6.0
840
8.0
220
619

Core Performance Indicators
Total visits (millions)
Child visits (000s)
Website visits (millions)
Children in educational programmes (000s)
C2DE adult visits (000s)2
2

From 2005-06, NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005
More than 12 million people will have participated in Tate’s programmes by the end of 2005-06 through visits to the four Tate
galleries, attendance at Tate exhibitions in the regions or abroad and logging on to Tate online. The programme of Collection
displays, exhibitions and other public events has, this last year, included amongst others: Frida Kahlo, Jeff Wall and Henri Rousseau:
Jungles in Paris at Tate Modern; Turner Whistler Monet, A Picture of Britain, Degas, Sickert and Toulouse Lautrec – London and Paris
1870-1910 at Tate Britain; Summer of Love: Art of the Psychedelic Era and Sarah Lucas at Tate Liverpool; and Richard Deacon and
Tacita Dean at Tate St. Ives. Seventeen of our exhibitions will have been shown in different venues in the UK and abroad.
Our education programmes will have attracted over 430,000 learners across our four sites. Our efforts and hard work have been
recognised and Open Tate Community Programme received a High Commendation for Most Innovative Learning Resource at the
Skills and Care National Awards.
Beyond the programme, Tate has continued to acquire works for the Collection; the highlights of this year include works by Sir
Joshua Reynolds and John Latham.

92

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

TATE
Personnel
Chairman
Mr Paul Myners CBE
(Chairman since 01.04.04)

Start date

End date

29.04.03

28.04.07

13.04.95
13.01.03
01.08.98
27.04.04
20.05.02
22.11.05
01.08.98
13.04.05
22.11.00
23.10.01
01.04.99
01.08.98
08.03.05

12.04.05
12.01.07
31.07.07
26.04.08
19.05.06
21.11.09
31.07.07
12.04.09
21.11.05
22.10.06
31.03.08
31.07.07
07.03.09

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Director
Sir Nicholas Serota
Trustees
Prof Dawn Ades
Ms Helen Alexander
Ms Victoria Barnsley
Ms Melanie Clore
Sir Howard Davies
Mr Anish Kapoor
Prof. Jennifer Latto
Ms Patricia Lankester
Mr Chris Ofili
Mr Julian Opie
Mr Jon Snow3
Mr John Studzinski
Ms Fiona Rae
3

13.04.00
01.08.03

01.08.03

01.04.04
01.08.03

National Gallery Liaison Trustee

Biennial Report 2002-04 available from www.tate.org.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

93

UK FILM COUNCIL
The UK Film Council is responsible for all DCMS funding, both Lottery and Grant-in-Aid, for film – including
the British Film Institute (bfi) – apart from funding for the National Film and Television School. The UK Film
Council’s aim is to stimulate a competitive, successful and vibrant British film industry and culture, and to
promote the widest possible enjoyment and understanding of cinema throughout the nations and regions
of the UK.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

24,110,000
30,749,0003
54,859,000

24,110,0001
31,204,0003
55,314,000

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other income
Total income

2005-06
Anticipated
Outturn
23,110,0001,2
32,705,0003
55,815,000

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

25,110,0002
26,206,0003,4
51,316,000

24,110,000
25,409,0003,4
49,519,000

1

Grant-in-Aid excludes the modernisation awards made to the bfi by the DCMS and administered by UK Film Council (2004-05: £800,000 : 2005-06: £1,000,000).
Grant-in-Aid includes the transfer of £1m agreed with DCMS from 2005-06 into 2006-07.
3
Figures do not include a delegation from Arts Council England of £15 million for investment in cinema related projects, to be drawn down throughout the
above period.
4
Key reason for the fall is the anticipated drop in our share of lottery proceeds and investment returns on our NLDF balance as it is utilised.
2

Key Achievements in 2005-06
• 212 Cinemas, (249 screens), received awards under the Digital Screen Network which is using £11.7 million of National Lottery
funding to install state-of-the art digital film projectors and related equipment in cinemas across the UK. The network will reach
around 30 million people throughout the UK with an expected increase in specialised film screenings of up to 165,000 in four
years. Up to the end of December 2005, 22 screens had already been installed.
• The Charter for Media Literacy was launched in December 2005. Drawn up by the Media Literacy Task Force, which is chaired by
UK Film Council Board Member Heather Rabbatts and comprises representatives of the BBC, The British Film Institute, Channel
Four, Skillset and the UK Film Council. The aim of the Charter is to raise the profile of media literacy as a significant portfolio of
skills, knowledge and understanding needed by every citizen in the 21st century.
• Through the bfi, Screenonline continues to deliver to schools and other institutions online access to over 300 hours of film
footage. By the end of December 2005, over 4,400 institutions were subscribers.
• London UK Film Focus event was held in London which brought to the UK 200 international buyers and distributors from 33
countries.
• Lottery backed films continued to perform well both critically and at the box office, notably with short Film Wasp wining Best
Short Film (Live Action) at the 2005 Annual Academy Awards (the Oscars), The Constant Gardner screened at the 2005 Venice
International Film Festival and was selected to open the London International Film Festival. In addition, two films supported by UK
Film Council, The Constant Gardener and Mrs Henderson Presents, were nominated for a total of six awards at the 2006 Oscars.
• Major elements of the Film Skills Training Strategy – A Bigger Future – were delivered in the period, notably the establishment of
the six ‘Screen Academies’ and the Film Business School. Other schemes and programmes delivered included the Guiding Lights
mentoring programme for 25 individuals and the New Entrants courses. To date over 6,600 individuals have benefited.
• The bfi restored Mitchell & Kenyon series on BBC2 and subsequently on other channels drew audiences of over six million in total
in the period.
• The nine English Regional Screen Agencies continue to serve the needs of their local regions through the Lottery Funded Regional
Investment Fund for England (RIFE). In 2004-05 the Regional Screen Agencies have enabled approximately 500,000 people to
benefit from schemes and initiatives aimed at promoting access to and understanding of film.
• The First Light scheme, aimed at providing children and young people with the opportunity to become involved in film making,
continued to fund projects all over the UK. To date approximately 9,000 young people from a range of backgrounds have directly
benefited.
• The Times bfi London Film Festival, the largest public film festival in Europe, saw the highest ever attendances for the event at
114, 025. The NFT hosted the 19th London Lesbian and Gay Film Festival and attracted the highest ever attendance of 23,000.
• In 2005, film production spending in the UK totalled more than £559 million, whilst British films accounted for 34% of the UK
box office revenue, the highest in ten years.

94

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

UK FILM COUNCIL
Personnel
Chairman
Stewart Till CBE

Start date

End date

30.07.04

29.07.08

Directors
Colin Brown
Gurinder Chadha
Mark Devereux
Andrew Eaton
Nigel Green
Stephen Knibbs
Anthony Minghella CBE
Alison Owen
Heather Rabbatts CBE
Marc Samuelson
Iain Smith

26.02.04
26.02.04
26.02.04
20.10.04
07.10.02
07.10.02
01.01.03
20.10.04
20.02.04
20.10.04
01.01.99

25.02.07
25.02.07
25.02.07
19.10.08
06.10.09
06.10.09
31.12.05
19.04.07
25.02.07
19.10.07
31.08.07

David Sproxton
Parminder Vir OBE

20.10.04
05.11.99

19.10.08
31.08.05

(if applicable)

Chief Executive
John Woodward

07.10.05
07.10.05

01.09.01
01.09.04

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

95

UK SPORT
UK Sport’s mission is to work in partnership to lead sport in the UK to world-class success. Its three main
areas of work are in relation to World Class Performance, Worldwide Impact and World Class Standards.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

23.175
1.730
24.905

23.500
7.826
31.326

29.305
0.800
30.105

52.105
0.900
53.005

63.005
0.900
63.905

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

3.242
2.226
5.065
15.099
0.157
25.789
1.730
24.059

3.184
1.738
8.059
18.383
0.411
31.775
7.826
23.949

3.595
2.874
7.933
15.436
0.267
30.105
0.800
29.305

3.674
2.693
8.139
38.143
0.356
53.005
0.900
52.105

3.930
2.400
7.950
49.500
0.125
63.905
0.900
63.005

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other income
Total income

Analysis of Resources
£ millions
Salary costs
Running costs
Operations
Current grants
Capital expenditure
Gross total
Less receipt (current)
Net total

1. World Class Performance
Funding
The DCMS announced last year that responsibility for the World Class Potential Programme for Olympic and Paralympic sports,
TASS and TASS 2012 scholarships and the funding and directing of the work of the English Institute of Sport will transfer from Sport
England to UK Sport with effect from 1 April 2006. UK Sport will also be responsible for the performance element of non-Olympic
sports. Overall funding invested by the World Class Performance Programme in the ‘Beijing’ Cycle (2005-09) stands at £98 million
and in 2005, UK Sport’s Performance Adviser, Peter Keen, developed the ‘No Compromise’ approach to funding elite athletes, with a
model that targets resources and activity predominately at those athletes capable of delivering medals. National Governing Bodies
then use the Programme funds to cover coaching, sports science and training facilities and UK Sport makes personal awards directly
to athletes to assist them with basic living costs, personal training and sports equipment.
Elite Coach & Fast Track Practitioner Programme
Nine coaches were inducted into the 2005 intake of UK Sport’s Elite Coach scheme and included former Olympic medallists Chris
Boardman and Kate Howey. The Fast Track Practitioner programme – placing high calibre graduates into high performance sport and
provide them with opportunities to develop – increased from 13 in 2004-05 to 25 in 2005-06.
UK Sport’s research and innovation
Several ground breaking projects including working with the Scottish Institute of Sport and The University of Edinburgh to develop a
curling ‘sweep ergometer’, and with British Diving and Frazer-Nash to develop a trampolining-based diving harness, a first for any
European country.
World Champions in UK Sport-funded sports
Criteria

Target

Actual

World Champions in Olympic and Non-Olympic sports

12

10

World Champions in Paralympic sports and Non-Paralympic sports

50

37

Notes
The number of World Champions will fluctuate from year to year depending on which events feature in the World Championship
calendar for that year.

96

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

UK SPORT
Supporting winning athletes
Criteria
Priority National Governing Bodies (NGBs) to have moved
to a one-stop plan system
Other modernisation programmes to have been implemented
in NGBs between April 2003 and April 2005

Target

Actual

10

10

40

Over 100

2. Worldwide Impact
Major Events
Sixteen grants awarded by UK Sport through its Lottery-funded World Class Events Programme, which supports the bidding for and
staging of major sporting events in the UK. The success rate of securing events now stands at 80%. Significant awards included up
to £250,000 for the 2006 Paralympic World Cup in Manchester, and up to £202,000 for the 2006 World Cup Trampoline and
Tumbling, Birmingham. In 2005, 11 highly successful events were staged with support from WCEP, including the UCI World Track
Cup Classic, the Bearingpoint Rowing World Cup, and the Inaugural Paralympic World Cup.
Staging world-class events in world-class style
Criteria
Success rate in the number of events secured
in an internationally competitive situation

Target

Actual

50%

80%

International Relations
2005 saw the revival of UK Sport’s charitable trust, the International Development through Sport UK (IDSUK), which aims to deliver
sports programmes in the world’s developing areas. Over the course of the year, IDSUK and UK Sport’s International Development
programmes have worked on several projects including: ‘Kicking AIDS Out! Network’ – a pan-African programme that aims to use sport
to deliver key messages about the disease and its prevention, and ‘Go Sisters’ – a Zambian programme which gives girls and young
women the chance to participate in sport. UK Sport staged its first ‘International Postholders Conference’ in London, an event aimed at
ensuring Britain’s voice is heard in the decision-making mechanisms of the global sporting infrastructure. The UK and South Africa
signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) in February. UK Sport Chair Sue Campbell was elected as Chair of the Commonwealth
Advisory Body on Sport (CABOS), which aims to facilitate and encourage the sharing of best practice across the Commonwealth.
Greater influence in international decision making
Criteria

Target

Actual

Percentage of partner sports to have an international strategy
of at least four years’ outlook by 2006

75%

50-60%

Percentage increase in the number of UK representatives holding
positions of authority in international federations and organisations

10%

33%

To successfully
launch
programme

Programme
launched

Establishment of a UK Sport International
Development Assistance Programme

3. World Class Standards
Drug Free Sport
UK Sport, in its role as national anti-doping organisation, conducted over 6,500 drug tests in 2005 across more than 40 sports. 98.5%
of the tests were negative. Launch of new National Anti-Doing Policy in May 05 to bring the UK in line with the Code, accompanied
by a set of Model Rules designed to help governing bodies of sport to comply fully with all mandatory provisions of the Code.
Anti-Doping Scrutiny Panel
Recommendations from the 2004 PMP review were also put in place, with the establishment of this independent Panel, created to carry
out constructive and objective scrutiny of UK Sport’s anti-doping work and effective implementation of the World Anti-Doping Code.
100% ME
UK Sport launched its 100% Me programme on 25 May 2005, with the objective of ‘creating a generation of sportsmen and
women who know they don’t need to use prohibited substances or methods to be successful’. Direct contact with over 2,500
athletes and support personnel through workshops and outreach.
SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

97

UK SPORT
Information services
Target
Achieve access to drug-free sport information services for athletes in the international and national testing pool.
Achievements include
• Partnership agreement in place with Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sport to establish the global Drug Information Database.
• 100% ME – the National Campaign for Drug-Free Sport successfully launched in May 2005. Campaign includes: National
Outreach Programme (six events since launch reaching over 3,000 athletes); Tutor Training programme (over 100 accredited tutors
across all four Home Countries); 32 athlete ambassadors for 100% Me signed up in 22 sports.

Appropriate system in place
Target
UK system meets agreed international certification standards and number of sports/governing bodies compliant with the national
policy and WAD Code
Achievements include
• ISO 9001:2000 certification maintained through BSI audit. Successful audit in October.
• UK Sport has signed WAD Code and is listed as a signatory on WADA website. UK National Anti-Doping Policy includes Code
requirements and standards. Launch of new Policy and Model Rules for Governing Bodies in May 2005.
• Governing Bodies consulted on the NGB Anti-Doping Agreement. Agreement finalised and circulated to all sports for signature.
Full cooperation and support of HCSC’s secured.
• Scrutiny Panel established and chair and members recruited. Two meetings held and reports published on UK Sport website.

Test distribution planning
Target
Effective test distribution planning to increase deterrence. For high and medium risk sports (covering all Olympic and Paralympic
sports GB competes in) achieve specified targets of minimum % volume of testing, using blood and urine testing as relevant in
and/or out of competition.
Achievements include
• WADA Compliant blood testing protocol in place.
• Overall Testing Programme for 2005-06 to be divided 50/50 across competition and out of competition testing.
• Drug Testing Database (DTD) Computer System – Athlete Whereabouts and TUE Computer System tendering completed.

Personnel
Chairman
Sue Campbell

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

19.09.03

18.03.09

19.03.05

01.07.99
07.03.00
14.11.02
14.11.02
14.11.02
14.11.02
27.11.02
01.02.04
19.09.05
19.09.05
01.07.05

30.06.05
31.03.07
13.11.08
13.11.08
13.11.05
13.11.05
26.11.06
31.01.07
18.09.08
18.09.08
30.06.09

01.07.02
01.04.03
14.11.05
14.11.05

Chief Executive
Mr John Steele
Members
Mr Alistair Dempster
Professor Eric Saunders OBE
Mr Nick Bitel
Ms Louise Martin CBE
Laura McAllister
Ms Constance St Louis
Lord Carter
Mr Philip Carling
Mr Rod Carr
Mr Chris Holmes
Ms Julia Bracewell OBE

98

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

27.11.05

VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM
The purpose of the Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A) is to enable everyone to enjoy its collection and
explore the cultures that created them; and to inspire those who shape contemporary design.
The Museum’s four key strategic objectives are as follows:
• Access and Audience
To provide optimum access to collections and services for diverse audiences, now and in the future.
• National and International
To be acknowledged and respected as the world’s leading museum of art and design.
• Creative Design
To promote, support and develop creativity in individuals and in the economy.
• Efficiency and Effectiveness
To operate with the greatest possible financial and organisational efficiency.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Trading company profit
Other income
Total income

34.84
5.88
1.83
8.32
50.87

36.19
4.28
0.88
13.66
55.01

38.23
4.02
1.15
14.55
57.95

39.11
4.10
1.63
10.22
55.06

41.78
4.10
1.90
15.18
62.96

Operating costs
Collections purchase
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

49.69
1.87
2.31
53.87

51.53
1.29
9.19
62.01

55.13
1.64
2.50
59.27

50.87
1.64
2.50
55.01

58.56
1.64
2.50
62.70

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

2.7

2.5

2.1

2.3

2.55

310

365

235

245

320

4.1

6.5

10

12

14

Number of children on and off-site organised
sessions (thousands)1

284

309

–

–

–

Number of C2DE visitors required to achieve an 8%
increase by 2005-06 on the 2002-03 baseline
(thousands)2

249

238

170

175

220

Resources £ millions

Core Performance Indicators
Total visitors (millions)
Child visitors (thousands)
Number of website visits (millions)

1

Under 16s. At time of publishing the guidelines for this PI had been changed and a new estimate for 2005-06 and plans for 2006-07 and 2007-08 had not been
calculated. These targets can be found in the Museum’s 2005-06 - 2007-08 Funding Agreement online on the DCMS website at the link below:
http://www.culture.gov.uk/museums_and_galleries/Sponsored_Bodies.htm
2
This measure was a Funding Agreement core target for 2003-04 and 2004-05. Revised from 2005-06 onwards to reflect over 16 UK C2DE visitors only.
From 2006-07 indicator will measure over 16 UK visitors from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006

99

VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM
Key Achievements 2005-06
• Successful fundraising from external sources has enabled completion of major projects under FuturePlan, the V&A’s long-term
re-development strategy to open up the Museum galleries and public spaces:
– The John Madejski Garden – Designed by Kim Wilkie and opened in July 2005.
– Sacred Silver & Stained Glass Gallery – Designed by John Ronayne and featuring stained glass display screens designed by Wendy
Ramshaw, opened in November 2005.
– Sculpture in Britain – Designed by Eva Jiricna. To open in March 2005.
– Central Hall Shop – To open March 2005 to offer improved facilities for visitors in a new, central location.
The V&A Museum of Childhood closed for c.12 months from October 2005 to enable phase 2 of its redevelopment to proceed,
and substantial progress was made on other major projects such as: Medieval & Renaissance Galleries; Education Centre; Islamic
Middle East gallery; Jewellery gallery; Ceramics Galleries and Restaurants.
• The V&A maintained a rich and diverse public programme:
– V&A websites began to achieve over 1 million visits per month, with a record-breaking 1.25 million in January 2006.
– Headline temporary exhibitions received 225,000 visits: International Arts & Crafts; Diane Arbus: Revelations; Between Past and
Future: New Photography and Video from China.
– Major Contemporary exhibitions received 120,000 visits: Spectres (free); Touch Me (charge); Import-Export (free).
– The V&A Museum of Performance opened Unleashing Britain: 10 years that shaped a nation 1955-1964 in November 2005, and
Oliver Messel: Making and Doing, to mark the acquisition of the Oliver Messel archive.
– The V&A Museum of Childhood showed Beatrix Potter’s Garden, On your Marks and Think and Wonder-Wonder and Think.
– V&A Publications published 12 new books and seven re-issues in paperback.
• Touring exhibitions continued to make V&A collections accessible to people in Britain and around the world. A total of nine
touring exhibitions were shown in 26 venues. The V&A also lends objects extensively from its collections:
– Internationally, four exhibitions were shown at 11 different venues and attracted 560,000 visits.
– In the UK, six exhibitions have travelled to 15 venues from Sunderland to Bristol, and attracted more than 170,000 visits.3
• The V&A UK Partnership with museums services in Tyne & Wear, Manchester, Sheffield, Birmingham and Brighton & Hove
continued to develop. Joint projects include the DCMS-DfEs-funded strategic commissioning project, Image & Identity, which also
includes NCH, the children’s charity; the Culture Online project, Every Object Tells a Story; and the competition for part-time adult
learners in art and design, Inspired By.
• Advances in research that underpins all the Museum’s public outputs in the form of galleries, exhibitions, books, web content etc.
– Academic Analogue status with the Art & Humanities Research Council (AHRC) – This achievement offers significant opportunities
to further develop the V&A’s research capacity.
– Eight AHRC Collaborative Doctoral Awards – An exceptionally high number of awards in collaboration with several Higher
Education institutions.
– Centre for Excellence in Teaching & Learning in Design (CETLD) – A partnership with the University of Brighton and the Royal
College of Art.
• Award of £978,000 by the Heritage Lottery Fund for a three-year cultural diversity project called ‘Capacity Building and Cultural
Ownership’, part of a larger, long-term, cross-museum programme of Access, Inclusion and Diversity that aims to embed these
principles in all areas of V&A activity. ‘Capacity Building and Cultural ownership’ has three major strands:
– Hidden Histories – object research and collections development;
– Access, Social Inclusion and Cohesion – gallery developments and public programmes for new, culturally diverse audiences;
– Capacity Building and Cultural Ownership – training initiatives which strengthen the skills of black and Asian sectors and
individuals.
• The V&A agreed an International Strategy, under which it is forging alliances with a number of museums and other organisations
in Asia, the US and Europe.
• The V&A was part of a consortium of 10 national museums that successfully bid to the Treasury’s Invest to Save budget in 200506 to fund a three-year project to increase use of the web as a learning resource.
• Significant acquisitions included:
– A pair of flintlock pistols made in the royal workshops of Tipu Sultan of Mysore, India, in 1795-6, by the leading armourer of the
time, Sayyid Ma’sum (supported by the National Art Collection Fund (NACF).
– The design for the baptismal font at Canterbury Cathedral. Executed by the sculptor and mason, John Christmas, in 1638-39, the
drawing is made with pen and watercolour on vellum, and is a rare survival from the Renaissance period (supported by the
NACF).
– A coat designed by Elsa Schiaparelli: one of the best examples of her close artistic collaboration with French artist, poet and film
maker Jean Cocteau (supported by the Friends of the V&A).
3

Not all visitor figures received from touring venues at time of writing.

100 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM
Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.11.98

31.10.07

1.11.03

Trustees
Mr Jonathan Altaras
Professor Margaret Buck
Mr Rob Dickins CBE
Professor Sir Christopher Frayling MA PhD
Mrs Jane Gordon Clark
Ms Betty Jackson MBE
Professor Lisa Jardine PhD
Mr Rick Mather

17.12.03
01.10.00
01.10.00
ex officio
01.10.00
06.12.04
17.12.03
31.10.00

16.12.06
30.09.06
30.09.07

02.11.04
01.10.04

30.09.06
05.12.08
16.12.07
30.10.08

Mr Peter Rogers
Mr Paul Ruddock
The Rt Hon Sir Timothy Sainsbury
Dame Marjorie Scardino DBE
Mr Samir Shah OBE

06.08.99
03.05.02
17.12.03
07.02.03
06.12.04

05.08.08
02.05.06
16.12.07
06.02.07
05.12.08

Personnel
Chairman
Paula Ridley OBE
Director
Mark Jones

01.10.02

31.10.02
31.10.05
06.08.04

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 101

VISITBRITAIN
The British Tourist Authority (BTA) and the English Tourist Board (ETB) were established under the
development of Tourism Act 1969 (the Act).
On 1st April 2003, activities of the ETB (trading as the English Tourism Council, ETC) were merged with those
of BTA and BTA assumed responsibility for the domestic marketing of England as well as the international
marketing of Britain. To reflect this enhanced remit, BTA adopted the new trading name of VisitBritain,
although it remains incorporated under the Act as the BTA and this is also its legal name. Similarly, the ETB
remains incorporated under the Act and acts as the England Marketing Advisory Board (EMAB).
VisitBritain’s mission is to build the value of inbound tourism to Britain and domestic tourism to England.
This is carried out through the following six objectives:
• Promote Britain overseas as a tourist destination, generating additional revenue throughout Britain and
throughout the year.
• Grow the value of the domestic market in England by encouraging people in Britain to spend more on
tourism throughout the year, informed by advice from the England Marketing Advisory Board.
• Help the UK tourism industry to address international and domestic markets more effectively.
• Provide advice to the Government on matters affecting tourism to Britain and contribute to wider
government objectives.
• Work in partnership with the devolved administrations and the national and regional authorities.
• The development and implementation of a domestic marketing strategy for England, informed by advice
from EMAB, working with private sector, regional and local government partners.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

51.1
18.7
69.8

48.41
16.35
64.7

48.92
21.7
70.6

49.93
22.25
72.15

49.94
22.256
72.15

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other income
Total income
1

2004-05 the core GIA was £48.4 (including £300k for capital). Included in this was additional GIA of £2.5m comprising challenge funding for England Marketing of
£1.5m and funding for EnglandNet of £1m. The overall split was £35.5m to promote Britain overseas as a tourist destination and £12.9m used for domestic and
international marketing of England.
2
2005-06 GIA includes £35.5m to promote Britain overseas as a tourist destination (of which £1m to be used in 10 agreed emerging markets), £13.4m for domestic
and international marketing of England.
3
2006-07 GIA includes £35.5m to promote Britain overseas as a tourist destination, £14.4m for domestic and international marketing of England.
4
2007-08 GIA includes £35.5m to promote Britain overseas as a tourist destination, £14.4m for domestic and international marketing of England.
5
In 2004-05 although there has been an overall reduction in other income, VisitBritain raised £2.8m collateral marketing and ‘in-kind’ support for domestic
marketing which is not recognised as an income in the accounts.
6
The estimated and planned increase of other income from 2005-06 onwards is expected from the increase of funds, which can be generated by VB on its online
and other activities around the world.

102 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

VISITBRITAIN
Britain International
Key Performance Indicators
International
Incremental spend target (£m)
Incremental spend generated (£m)

England domestic
Key Performance Indicators
Domestic
Incremental spend target (£m)
Incremental spend generated (£m)

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

994
1,080

1,0307
1,669

1,0658
–

1,065
–

1,065
–

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

104
62.4

141.99
145.5

160.8
–

187.2
–

201.6
–

7

In 2004-05, VisitBritain conducted over 60% more marketing activity evaluation than in 2003-04. Such a large increase of marketing activity evaluation identified
that VisitBritain was achieving much greater ROI than previously thought. Because of this, the lower targets that were set for 2005-06 and 2006-07 to reflect the
impact that the NTB agency model* and new and emerging markets would make have now been revised.
8
VisitBritain expects to make an ROI of at least 30:1 for the coming three years (from 2006-07 to 2007-08). However, it may exceed this target as it did in the year
2004-05.
9
Additional tourism expenditure of £145.5m for England was generated from domestic visitors which is a return on investment of 11.3:1 on Grant-in-Aid of £12.9m.
*In four priority European markets (France, Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands) VB now offers an agency model to the National Tourism Boards (NTB) to
market their respective countries without having to maintain a network of overseas offices. The NTB agency model includes VisitScotland, Wales Tourist Board,
Visit London and England Marketing. The growing maturity of these four near-European markets has led to increased levels of awareness of Britain’s individual
countries and destinations. This maturity has meant that VisitBritain could stop all proactive marketing of Britain and instead only market for Visit London,
VisitScotland, England Marketing and the Wales Tourist Board when they chose to work directly in one of these markets.

Key Achievements in 2004-05
International Marketing
VisitBritain’s thee-year strategy for international marketing was launched in October 2002. The strategy focuses on redefining the
organisation’s approach to overseas marketing and developing new and innovative marketing techniques. The strategy, which runs
from 2003-04 to 2005-06, focuses on four areas:
• Brand: sharpening the brand position of Britain.
• Marketing: honing marketing skills and exploiting the potential of new media.
• Stakeholders: engaging public and private stakeholders in the marketing of Britain.
• Culture: aligning the culture and organisation to deliver these objectives.
In 2004-05, VisitBritain’s International marketing achieved the following:
• The Britain brand values (developed in partnership with VisitScotland, the Wales Tourist Board, Visit London and England’s Regional
Tourist Boards during 2003-04) were embedded in all communications (four million pieces of print, 30 campaigns, 70,000 web pages).
• Strategies were implemented in four new markets (China, Poland, Russia and South Korea), local language websites were
developed and PR networks and trade contacts established.
• In January 2005, the Chinese government granted the UK, Approved Destination Status (ADS), which simplifies exit procedures for
Chinese tourists. This paves the way for a significant increase in Chinese visitors over the next decade and in order to maximise the
potential of this market, VisitBritain has opened a pan-Asia contact centre, based in Hong Kong, which will provide information on Britain
in English, Cantonese and Mandarin. VisitBritain has also opened offices in Shanghai and Beijing to support its marketing activities.
• VisitBritain continued to develop online and customer relationship management (CRM) strategies throughout 2004-05. Over five
million customer records are now held in the international database and VisitBritain is on track to achieve its target of 6.3 million
contacts on the database by the end of 2005-06.
• The www.visitbritain.com family of websites (39 sites with 20 in local languages) was re-launched and was voted the ‘World’s
Leading Tourism Authority Internet Site’ at the annual World Travel Awards.
• The So British magazine (circulation 200,000) was launched in the US and Russia. The glossy 120+ page magazine is aimed at the
luxury end of the visitor market and is dedicated entirely to Britain and British products. The magazine is the primary vehicle for
VisitBritain’s Good Living campaign in the USA, which positions Britain as a premier luxury destination.
• Preparation began to create new ways for working in near-European markets with VisitScotland, the Wales Tourist Board, Visit London
and England Marketing, under the new National Tourist Board Model. The NTBs and the England Marketing Division within VisitBritain
will lead on marketing the individual destination brands in four priority markets – France, Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands.
• The core international campaigns delivered by VisitBritain in 2004-05 were: Short Breaks (Cities), Main Stay (Touring), Gay &
Lesbian and Youth.
SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 103

VISITBRITAIN
England Marketing
VisitBritain launched its three-year domestic marketing strategy for England in October 2003. Its overall aim is to grow the value of
the domestic market by encouraging the British to spend more on tourism throughout the English regions and throughout the year.
The strategy, which runs from 2003-04 to 2005-06, focuses on six areas:
• Insights: understanding market potential.
• Relationships: engaging with private and public stakeholders in England.
• Products and brands: communicating destination appeal.
• Distribution: making it easy to access information and book holidays in England.
• Quality: defining market needs to enable the customer to make informed choices.
• Resources: aligning culture and organisation.
In 2004-05, England Marketing achieved the following:
• Following extensive research and consultation, the England brand values were established as Real, Fun and Indulgent. The brand
values have been communicated to all stakeholders.
• Two national enjoyEngland campaigns and three lifestyle campaigns were launched – Waterside, Taste and Justrelax. The Waterside
campaign supports the SeaBritain 2005 nationwide festival.
• www.visitengland.com was developed as the definitive domestic tourism site with extensive information and special offers from
partners. The website achieved over one million visitors during 2004-05.
• Successful partnership working was established with key travel trade industry representatives and relationships were strengthened
with regional delivery partners.
• Work continued towards expanding the national consumer database and a CRM strategy was developed.
• References to quality-accredited products were included in campaign activity and the quality of the England product was
promoted to ensure the consumer is able to make informed choices on accommodation in England. England Marketing also
promoted quality to the consumer and recognised excellence through the enjoyEngland Excellence Awards, which achieved
worldwide media coverage.
• In December 2005 VisitBritain launched its new Britain international and enjoyEngland strategies that will take effect from 1 April
2006.

Personnel
Chairman
Lord Marshall of Knightsbridge
Chief Executive
Tom Wright
(appointed as Chief Executive 01.08.03)
Board members – VisitBritain
Lord Marshall of Knightsbridge
Penelope, Viscountess Cobham
Martin George
Alan Parker
Kumar Muthalagappan
Moir Lockhead OBE
Philip Evans CBE
Hugh Taylor
Peter Lederer CBE
Board members – EMAB
Hugh Taylor (Chairman)
Suzanne Bond
Tim Cantle-Jones
Nick Cust
John Govett
Sir William Lawrence Bt. OBE
Brian Summers

104 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Start date

End date

02.01.05

01.01.08

01.06.02

02.01.05
07.04.03
01.11.03
01.04.03
01.03.02
11.07.05
ex-officio
ex-officio
ex-officio

01.01.08
06.04.06
resigned 31.12.05
31.03.06
28.02.06
10.07.09

01.04.05
01.05.03
01.08.03
01.09.03
01.05.03
01.02.04
01.05.03

31.03.09
30.04.06
31.07.06
31.08.06
30.04.06
31.01.07
30.04.06

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

WALLACE COLLECTION
A collection of paintings, furniture, ceramics, arms and armour and other works of art bequeathed to the
nation by Lady Wallace in 1897.
The Wallace Collection aims to safeguard Hertford House and its unique and varied collection, making it
accessible, understandable and encouraging the study of 18th century French art and 19th century collecting.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid
Other operating income
Other income
Total income1

3.0
0.4
1.0
4.4

2.6
0.4
1.6
4.6

2.6
0.4
1.7
4.7

3.5
0.4
1.0
4.9

4.2
0.4
1.0
5.6

Operating costs
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

3.2
0.7
3.9

4.2
0.6
4.8

3.9
1.0
4.9

3.9
1.0
4.9

4.1
1.5
5.6

Resources £ millions

1

Income does not match expenditure each year as non-Grant-in-Aid income can be retained to fund future expenditure.

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

0.236
0.016
0.43
11.3
16.5

0.288
0.017
0.457
11.884
11.52

0.21
0.014
0.5
12.0
13.0

0.255
0.017
0.55
12.5
14.5

0.26
0.0175
0.65
13.0
15.0

Core Performance Indicators
Total visitors (millions)
Child visitors (millions)
Number of website visits (millions)
Number of children in educational programmes (000s)
Number of C2DE visitors2
2

From 2006-07 visits by adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Key Achievements in 2005-06
2005-06 was another exciting year for the Wallace Collection. Although visitor numbers were down this year, this was no great
surprise following the high of 2004-05 with the landmark Freud and Boucher exhibitions. The July bombings in London also affected
visitor numbers to all attractions across the capital. The two main exhibitions this year however achieved notable critical and public
acclaim. Salvator Rosa: Wild Landscapes was well received, whilst Dancing to the Music of Time: The Life and Work of Anthony Powell
attracted a different literary crowd to the Wallace Collection and also received excellent media coverage. The main publication this
year was the sumptuous Scala Publication of The Wallace Collection. This built on the work of the previous year’s Illustrated Picture
Catalogue to provide a detailed study of the entire diverse collection. Despite the disappointment of the overall visitor numbers, the
innovative work of the Education department ensured that we continued to attract high numbers of children and adults into the
wide variety of programmes offered. Expansion was also achieved through the successful regional partnership programmes. The
exciting Collections Management System, now dubbed Wallace Live, also moved closer to fruition with the purchase of the new
system. 2006-07 will see the population of the system with a view to going live in 2007-08. The Conservation team also had an
incredible year, partly in support of the Wallace Live project by cleaning 450 items of arms and armour, ready for photography.
Other major conservation works included the restoration of the Mandarin Warrior.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 105

WALLACE COLLECTION
Personnel
Chairman
Mr John Ritblat

Start date

End date

01.01.05

31.12.08

03.03.98
28.03.01
16.02.00
25.04.01
25.02.00
08.08.03
15.07.03
08.08.03

02.03.06
27.03.06
15.02.09
24.04.06
24.02.09
07.08.07
14.07.07
07.08.07

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Director
Miss Rosalind Savill
Trustees
Sir Geoffrey de Bellaigue
Dr Fram Dinshaw
Lady Irvine of Lairg
Mr Martin Drury CBE
Miss Carole Stone
Sir Timothy Clifford
Mr Richard Dorment
Hon Barbara Thomas

106 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

03.03.01
16.02.05
25.02.05

YORKSHIRE CULTURE
Yorkshire Culture was established in 1999, and in 2004 changed from an advisory to an executive NDPB and
was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee. Its role is to champion the whole spectrum of cultural
and creative interests in the region, including tourism and sport, and it has responsibility for implementing the
regional cultural strategy. In addition, it has a role in central policy-making, regional data collection and
research. The Chair is appointed by the Secretary of State under Nolan principles.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

208,324

238,951

220,737

215,000

215,000

Resources £s
Annual expenditure from DCMS funds1

1

Figures shown reflect estimated outturn from DCMS Grant-in-Aid funds. A full breakdown of all annual income and expenditure is available in Yorkshire Culture
Annual Report & Audited Accounts 2004-05, information available on request, see www.yorkshire-culture.co.uk

Key Achievements in 2005
Yorkshire Culture has continued to champion the value of the DCMS sectors as part of broader regional development through
practical and pragmatic relationships across the sectors and key regional agencies.
This year has enabled Yorkshire Culture to consolidate and develop formal and informal partnerships with the DCMS agencies, the
local authorities and the key regional agencies. The consortium has focused on the critical changes in the tourism sector, the
establishment of the regional cultural observatory and, most critically, a deeper and collective understanding of the region’s key
cultural assets and the structures and investments needed for sustainability and growth. As a result, there is emerging agreement
around priorities, a better determination of impacts (cultural, social, economic) and this work is increasingly reflected in the region’s
investment strategies and policies. Yorkshire Culture’s role as advisor to Yorkshire Forward, as a member of the Yorkshire and Humber
Assembly, as steering group member for many regional developments including, for example, Yorkshire’s support for the London
2012 Olympics, have seen the Consortium’s influence and impact grow.
As a result of this activity, Yorkshire Culture has facilitated support for projects and programmes as diverse as Building Schools for
the Future, the Tour of Britain cycle race and is leading cultural feasibility work for the Northern Way. This work will ensure the
continued recognition of the value of the cultural sector in the development of future regional regeneration and growth in the
Yorkshire and Humber.

Personnel
Chairman
Clive W Leach CBE

Start date

End date

27.03.04

26.03.08

12.10.04
12.10.04
12.10.04
12.10.04
12.10.04
12.04.05
21.06.05
12.04.05
12.10.04
12.10.04
12.10.04
12.10.04

11.10.07
11.10.07
11.10.07
11.10.07
11.10.07
11.04.08
20.06.08
11.04.08
11.10.07
11.10.07
11.10.07
11.10.07

12.10.04
12.10.04

21.06.05
26.09.05

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chief Executive
Gary Topp
Board members
Ms Ruth Churchill Dower
Mrs Helen Schroeder
The Very Reverend George Nairn Briggs
Mr John Davies
Mr Michael Beverley
Dr Adam Carey
Mr Colin Jeynes
Mrs Leigh-Anne Stradeski
Councillor Michael Pye
Mr Robin Smith
Mr Narendra Bajaria
Ms Louise Hampson
The following directors resigned during this period;
Mr Abi Ekoku
Ms Jane Grenville

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 107

PUBLIC CORPORATIONS
A Public Corporation is similar to an executive NDPB but it is mainly a trading body, receiving
more than 50% of its income from fees and charges to customers.

108 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION (BBC)
The BBC is the UK’s main public service broadcaster. Established by Royal Charter as a public corporation in
1927, it was among the world’s pioneers in radio and television and has acted as a focal point for the identity
and culture of the nation.
Resources
The television licence fee provides the main source of finance for the BBC’s public services. In 2004-05, total licence fee income was
£2,940 million. The total turnover of the BBC’s commercial activities was £624.3 million.
Main Activities
DCMS aims to ensure that the public’s interest in the BBC is safeguarded in the continuing development of broadcasting policy,
including the BBC’s contribution to digital broadcasting. The Department’s role is to monitor and oversee strategic decisions about
the BBC, recognising that, within the framework of the Royal Charter and Agreement, the BBC itself is primarily responsible for both
the content of its broadcasting and its effectiveness and efficiency. Ofcom now also has a role in regulating certain aspects of the
BBC’s performance. The BBC is directly responsible and accountable to its audiences and produces an annual Statement of
Programme Policies setting out the standards and services viewers and listeners can expect.
DCMS also takes the lead in advising on appointments to the Board of Governors, approves proposals by the BBC to expand its
public and commercial services under the provisions of the Charter and Agreement, sets the level of the television licence fee,
makes and monitors legislation and regulations relating to the licence fee, approves licence conditions and new methods of
payment, and pays the Home Service Grant (which delivers to the BBC revenue equivalent to that received by the Government
from the licence fee). The BBC is responsible for issuing licences, enforcing the licensing system and collecting licence fee revenue.
The BBC operates two national analogue television channels, five national analogue radio stations, radio stations for Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland, and 40 local radio stations in England. The BBC operates World Service radio, which is separately funded by
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. In 2004-05 the BBC broadcast 50,243 hours of programmes on terrestrial and digital
television, and 344,882 hours on national and local radio.
The BBC provides a range of digital services including: BBC One and BBC Two in widescreen, BBC News 24, BBC Parliament,
Cbeebies, CBBC, BBC Three and BBC Four. The BBC also provides five digital radio stations, available on DAB Digital Radio, Freeview,
Satellite and via the internet: Five Live Sports Extra, 6 Music, the Asian Network, 1Xtra and BBC 7.
Start date
(if applicable)

End date

17.05.04

16.05.08

Vice-Chairman
Anthony Salz

01.08.04

31.07.08

Governors
Ranjit Sondhi CBE
Professor Fabian Monds CBE
Dermot Gleeson
Baronesss Deech DBE (Ruth)
Angela Sarkis CBE
Professor Merfyn Jones
Deborah Bull CBE
Richard Tait
Jeremy Peat
Sir Andrew Burns KCMG

01.08.98
01.08.99
01.11.00
23.10.02
23.10.02
01.01.03
01.08.03
01.08.04
01.01.05
01.07.05

22.10.06
31.07.07
31.09.08
22.10.06
22.10.06
31.12.06
31.07.07
31.07.08
31.12.08
31.12.06

The following resigned
Dame Pauline Neville-Jones DCMG
Sir Robert Smith

01.01.98
01.08.99

Personnel1
Chairman
Michael Grade CBE

Date reappointed

Director-General
(appointed by the Board of Governors)
Mark Thompson

1

Reappointed 23.10.02
Reappointed 13.06.03
Reappointed 01.08.04

Resigned 31.12.04 (Reappointed 13.6.03)
Resigned 31.12.04 (Reappointed 13.6.03)

The Secretary of State for Culture, Media & Sport announced in March 2005 that the Board of Governors is to be abolished and replaced by a new Trust. Further
information about the composition of the Trust is expected in the Government’s White Paper on the BBC’s new charter, due for publication in 2006.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 109

CHANNEL FOUR TELEVISION CORPORATION
The Channel Four Television Corporation is a self-funding statutory corporation whose primary purpose is
providing public service broadcasting for the fourth channel on analogue (except in Wales) and digital
platforms. It has a statutory duty to provide a broad range of high quality and diverse programmes which, in
particular: demonstrate innovation, experiment and creativity in form and content; appeal to the tastes and
interests of a culturally diverse society; include programmes of an educational nature and of educative value;
and exhibit a distinctive character.
In addition to the core channel, Channel 4 also operates a range of digital TV channels, including E4, More4
and FilmFour, and a growing portfolio of broadband services at channel4.com, including FourDocs.
Resources
Channel 4 is wholly funded from commercial revenues, primarily the sale of advertising.

Main Activities
In 2004 Channel 4 broadcast 8,784 hours of programmes. It made a post tax profit of £46.0 million on a group turnover of £841.4
million.

Personnel
Non-executive Members1

Start date

End date

Chairman
Luke Johnson

28.01.04

27.01.07

Deputy Chairman
Lord Puttnam of Queensgate
Barry Cox

01.02.06
01.01.98

31.01.09
31.12.05

Sue Ashtiany
Karren Brady
Tony Hall
Stephen Hill
Martha Lane Fox
Andy Mollett
Ian Ritchie
Robin Miller

01.07.03
19.07.04
01.04.05
01.01.06
01.02.06
19.07.04
01.01.00
01.02.99

30.06.07
30.06.07
31.03.09
31.12.08
31.01.09
30.06.07
31.12.05
31.01.06

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.01.03

01.01.04
01.02.03
01.02.05

Executives
Andy Duncan
Anne Bulford
Rod Henwood
Kevin Lygo
Andy Barnes
1

Chief Executive since July 2004
Group Finance Director since July 2005
New Business Director since July 2005
Director of Television since November 2003
Sales Director; member of Board since 1997

The Chairman, Deputy Chairman and other non-executive members of the Corporation are appointed by Ofcom with the approval of the Secretary of State.

Annual Report available from Channel 4, 124 Horseferry Road, London SW1P 2TX, or from the Channel 4 website at
www.channel4.com.

110 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

HISTORIC ROYAL PALACES
Historic Royal Palaces is a charity established by Royal Charter in 1998. Its Cause is to help everyone to
explore the story of how monarchs and people together have shaped society in some of the greatest palaces
ever built. Historic Royal Palaces has responsibility for five Royal Palaces: Hampton Court with its gardens and
park, the Tower of London, Kensington Palace State Apartments with its immediate gardens, the Royal
Ceremonial Dress Collection and Orangery, Kew Palace with Queen Charlotte’s Cottage and the Banqueting
House, Whitehall. Historic Royal Palaces is a self financing charity receiving no Grant-in-Aid. Historic Royal
Palaces was redefined as a Public Corporation with effect from 1 April 2005 (previously an NDPB).
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

nil
45.6

nil
46.0

nil
42.0

nil

nil

2003-04
Actual

2004-05
Actual

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

12.6

12.0

5.5
3.2

2002-03

2003-04

2004-05
target

2005-06

2006-07

Value for Money

1.14

0.87

1.07

Greater
than 0.7

tbd

Enjoyment of Visit

1.45

1.33

1.39

Greater
than 1.25

tbd

Helpfulness/friendliness of staff

1.53

1.45

1.44

Greater
than 1.25

tbd

Resources £ millions
Grant
Total Income

Key Performance Indicators
Finance
Year end cash £m
Free Reserves
(new target 2005-06 shown)

Visitor Satisfaction ratings

Key to ratings: 2.0 = extremely good; 1.0 = quite good; 0.0 = acceptable; -1.0 = quite poor; -2.0 = very poor

Conservation Targets 2005-06
Invest at least £2 million in the conservation of our palaces, including successful delivery of the following projects:
• HCP Lead roofs, phase 1
• ToL Byward Tower, masonry repairs
• Kew Palaces external decorations

Access and Learning Targets 2005-06
Customer satisfaction with education services at HCP Achieve survey results:
• Enjoyments – above 1.00
• Quality of service – above 1.00
• Quality of sessions – above 1.00

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 111

HISTORIC ROYAL PALACES
Key Achievements for 2005
• An over-arching cause was developed for Historic Royal Palaces (see above) and a three year strategy with a wealth of creative
ideas was generated as a result of it.
• In improving the visitor experience, we have launched major new exhibitions: Soldiers, Suffragettes and Servants, Gunpowder
Treason and Diana, Princess of Wales by Mario Testino. This last project was made possible through the biggest sponsorship we have
ever secured – from HSBC Private Bank.
• Our two major projects – Kew Palace and the Clore Learning Centre at Hampton Court have progressed well and we look forward
especially to the re-opening of Kew in 2006.
• We also have other new projects, Henry VIII and the re-presentation of Kensington Palace, both starting to take shape.
• We have set a clear aim to make more of an impact in the world and become better known for the work we do. Tales from the
Palaces on the BBC has been a great showcase for this.
• Our new membership scheme has been launched together with a new volunteer programme and the visual identity which
emerged as part of the cause is starting to be used in our communications.
• Internally, we have designed a performance framework founded on our Cause that clearly sets out the way we will expect
everyone to perform in their jobs.
• With no public funding, the financial challenge was clear in our strategy and became more acute after 7/7. The impact of this has
been an estimated loss in visitor income of about £5 million this year. Some of this loss has been offset by increased income from
functions and events: the first music festival and ice rink at the Tower, new functions happening in the State Apartments at
Kensington, another record year for business at the Banqueting House while the undoubted highlight was the EU Heads of
Government Conference at Hampton Court in October. However we have also had to make cuts and savings which will impact
significantly on our plans for 2006-07.

Personnel
Chairman
Sir Nigel Mobbs
(Trustee since 29.07.02,
Died in October 2005)

Start date

End date

01.01.03

23.09.05
(resigned due to
ill health)

Date of reappointment
(if applicable in 2005/06)

Chief Executive
Michael Day
Trustees
Under the current Royal Charter, Trustees are appointed for a three-year term and may be reappointed for a further two three-year
terms. The Board consists of a Chairman and eight Trustees, five of whom are appointed by the Secretary of State and one of those
must be the Constable of the Tower of London. A further three trustees are appointed by HM The Queen.
Bridget Cherry OBE FSA

01.01.03

31.12.08

John Hamer

27.05.05

26.05.08

Angela Heylin OBE

01.04.98

31.03.07

Field Marshal The Rt. Hon. Lord Inge KG GCB DL1
(Deputy and appointed Acting Chairman on 01.10.05
following the resignation of Sir Nigel Mobbs)

01.04.98

30.06.06

Malcolm Reading

04.04.05

03.04.08

01.08.02

31.07.08

Sir Hugh Roberts KCVO FSA

01.04.98

31.03.07

General Sir Roger Wheeler GCB CBE2

01.08.01

31.07.07

Alan Reid1
1

1
2

01.01.06

01.10.05

01.08.05

25.10.05

Appointments determined by The Queen
Appointed ex-officio – Constable of the Tower of London

Annual Report available from Historic Royal Palaces, Hampton Court Palace, Surrey, KT8 9AU or on website www.hrp.org.uk

112 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

HORSERACE TOTALISATOR BOARD (TOTE)
The Horserace Totalisator Board (Tote) is a statutory authority, which was first established as the Racecourse
Betting Control Board, by the Racecourse Betting Act 1928. It was given its present official name in 1963, but
has always been known as the Tote. It was founded for two purposes: to enable race-goers to bet by means of
a totalisator (i.e. horserace pool betting) of which it has the exclusive licence; and to raise money for racing.
Originally under the regulation of the Home Office, the Tote was transferred to the Department for Culture,
Media and Sport (DCMS) in 2001. The Secretary of State for DCMS appoints all Tote Board members.
It is the Government’s intention to sell the Tote to a consortium of racing interests. Legislation to enable this,
in the form of the Horserace Betting and Olympic Lottery Bill, entered Parliament on 2nd December 2003
and received Royal Assent on the 28th October 2004.
Key Achievements in 2004-05
The business operates via the following channels:
• Totepool racecourse – operates pool betting at all of Britain’s 59 racecourses.
• Totesport retail – operates 71 betting shops at 42 racecourses, 460 betting shops off-course.
• Totesport telephone- takes six million calls per year, offices at all racecourses.
• Totesport internet – over 100,000 customers. Offers fixed odds bets, totepool bets and gaming products.
• Tote Direct – offers pool betting at 5,100 betting shops off-course.
2004-05 saw continued growth with turnover of £1,889 million, an increase of 28% on 2003-04. Despite improved turnover
performance, a run of poor results resulted in lower profit margins which in combination gave rise to a group operating profit of
£24.2 million, down 5.9% on the previous year.
The racecourse division’s performance was in line with previous year with turnover up 0.4% to £123 million. Despite the extra
fixtures, from 1,245 to 1,310, average attendances on racecourses fell by 0.5% with a 2.0% fall in average real spend per customer.
The retail division turnover rose by over 40% in 2004-05 to £1,404 million. Unlike recent years, fewer opportunities to make
attractive acquisitions of betting shops presented themselves. Despite this a number of new licences and transfers to better trading
positions were effected strengthening the overall quality of the retail estate.
Totesport telebetting business for the first quarter of 2004-05 was badly hit by the temporary loss of ‘AttheRaces’ TV coverage with
turnover falling in that period by 15% and was down 3.4% for the year. For the first time in 20 years the Tote is again represented
on the rails following the purchase of a number of racecourse pitches in June 2004.
The internet division delivered a satisfactory performance with turnover up by 32% to £40.6 million. In January 2005 the Tote
introduced the fixed odds gaming channel, but is legally constrained from providing a fully competitive casino product.
Tote Direct estate grew in size, with over 5,100 shops trading into the pools. Turnover for the year ended 31 March 2005 was
£100.6 million compared to £96.5 million in the previous year. In May 2005 the Tote purchased the shares held by Coral and
Ladbrokes in Tote Direct and has traded as a wholly owned subsidiary since that date.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 113

HORSERACE TOTALISATOR BOARD (TOTE)
Personnel
Chairman
Peter Jones

Start date

End date

01.08.97

31.07.07

29.04.91
01.05.02
01.07.99
01.07.99
01.05.02
16.01.06
16.01.06

01.01.06
30.04.06
30.06.06
30.06.06
30.04.06
15.01.08
15.01.08

Date reappointed
(if applicable)
01.08.00
01.08.03
01.12.05

Chief Executive
Trevor Beaumont
Board members
Tom Phillips
Joe Scanlon
Gerry Grimstone
Fiona Driscoll
Sir Eric Parker
Noel Harwerth
Ian Good

01.07.02
01.07.02
01.05.04

An annual report is available from the Horserace Totalisator Board, Douglas House, Tote Park, Chapel Lane, Wigan WN3 4HS

114 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

OFFICE OF COMMUNICATIONS
The Office of Communications (Ofcom) is the independent regulator for the UK communications industries,
with responsibilities across television, radio, telecommunications and wireless communications services. It is a
public corporation, operating principally under the terms of the Communications Act 2003 and the Office of
Communications Act 2002.
Ofcom’s annual report, covering the period April 2004 – March 2005, is available at www.Ofcom.org.uk.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid:
Community radio

nil

nil

0.4

0.5

0.5

Grant-in-Aid:
Media Literacy

nil

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

Resources £ millions

Key Performance Indicators
Grant-in-Aid:
Community radio
2005-06

Ofcom awarded over 93 community radio licences across the UK, of which around 20
stations have commenced broadcasting. Further licences will be awarded in the future.
Ofcom made the first awards from the community radio fund to community radio licence
holders in 2006; early indications suggested that funding was used to support core
functions such as management, administration, fundraising to support the station,
community outreach and volunteer organisation and support.

Grant-in-Aid:
Media literacy

2004-05

Ofcom undertook a public consultation on its strategy and priorities for the promotion of
media literacy which resulted in the publication of Ofcom’s Media Literacy Statement in
November 2004. Ofcom also launched a dedicated media literacy section on its website.

2005-06

Ofcom commissioned an extensive Media Literacy Audit, a major piece of work aimed at
benchmarking current media literacy across the UK, changes to which can then be tracked
over time. The core report was published in March 2006, with additional reports on
different groups, including each nation, published during 2006. In addition, Ofcom has
produced quarterly media literacy bulletins and supported a wide range of media literacy
programmes and events, such as Adult Learners Week 2005.

2006-07

Ofcom will continue to undertake key research and support local and national media
literacy activity across the UK.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 115

OFFICE OF COMMUNICATIONS
Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Chairman
David Currie2

01.08.02

31.07.09

20.01.06

Deputy Chairman
Richard Hooper
Philip Graf

25.09.02
01.01.06

31.12.05
31.12.08

Members
Millie Banerjee
Ian Hargreaves
Stephanie Liston
Sarah Nathan

25.09.02
24.12.02
01.09.05
25.09.02

30.09.07
31.12.06
31.08.08
30.09.06

Personnel
Non-Executive Board members1

1

Ofcom Non-Executive Board members are appointed jointly by DCMS and DTI.
Further information is available in the Ofcom Annual Report 2004-05.
2
David Currie’s current term originally ended on 31.07.07. He has been reappointed until 31.07.09.

116 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

SIANEL PEDWAR CYMRU (S4C)
Sianel Pedwar Cymru is the statutory authority responsible for providing and regulating Welsh language public
service television. The Authority’s main function is to provide television programme services for the
dissemination of information, education and entertainment with a view to their being available for reception
wholly or mainly by members of the public in Wales.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

85.2

92.2

92.2

92.2

92.8

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid

Note: S4C is funded by Grant-in-Aid from DCMS, the level of which is set by statute as a sum equivalent to its 1997 grant uprated
in line with the Retail Prices Index.

Main Activities
On analogue the Welsh Authority is required to provide the fourth channel in Wales, ‘S4C’. Its remit is to provide a broad range
of high quality and diverse programming, a substantial proportion of which is in Welsh (with the programmes broadcast in peak
hours consisting mainly of programmes in Welsh and the English programmes normally being Channel 4 programmes). On the
digital service, ‘S4C Digidol’, the remit is to simulcast the Welsh language elements of the analogue service and provide a broad
range of high quality and diverse programming in a service in which a substantial proportion of the programmes consists of
programmes in Welsh.
During 2005 S4C broadcast an average of 41 hours a week of Welsh language programmes on ‘S4C’ and 86 hours a week on
‘S4C Digidol’. S4C commissioned 88% of its original programming output (excluding hours received from the BBC, ITV and in-house
production) from the independent production sector in Wales.
In addition to its public service television services S4C provides coverage of the National Assembly of Wales and additional services
on its digital television service, ‘S4C2’.

Personnel1
Chairman
Professor Elan Closs Stephens

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.04.98

31.03.06

01.04.02

01.04.99
01.01.03
24.11.03
01.09.04
01.11.01
01.11.01
24.11.03
01.09.04

31.03.07
31.12.07
23.11.07
31.08.08
31.10.09
31.10.09
23.11.07
31.08.08

01.04.03

Chief Executive
Ms Iona Jones
Members
Ms Enid Rowlands
Mrs Carys Howell
Mr Roger Jones
Mr Winston Roddick QC
Mrs Eira Davies
Dr Christopher Llewelyn
Mr Dafydd Wigley
Mr John Walter Jones
1

01.11.05
01.11.05

The Chair and the members of the S4C Authority are appointed by the Secretary of State.

The S4C Annual Report is available from S4C, Parc Ty Glas, Llanishen, Cardiff CF14 5DU or the website: www.s4c.co.uk

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 117

OTHER BODIES

118 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

ROYAL HOUSEHOLD
The Secretary of State is statutorily responsible for the care and maintenance of the English Occupied
Palaces, which comprise Buckingham Palace, St James’s Palace, Clarence House, Kensington Palace (the
residential and office areas), Windsor Castle (including the buildings in the Home and Great Parks), and the
Royal Mews and Paddocks at Hampton Court Palace. The Royal Household provides these services which are
funded by Grant-in-Aid.
Royal Communications is the annual funding for communication and information services in connection with
official royal functions and engagements.
The Grant-in-Aid also includes funding for property maintenance and security at Marlborough House, which is
occupied by the Commonwealth Secretariat. The Royal Household maintains Marlborough House in effect as
the Department’s contractor, and the expenditure is not a cost of the Monarchy.
A windfall receipt for the sale of land was received by the Department during 2005-06, £2m of which has
been made available as capital expenditure for the Royal Household. In addition the Treasury has announced
that £2m of the proceeds from the sale of a £5 coin to commemorate the 80th birthday of Her Majesty The
Queen, will be made available to fund the design and construction of a Memorial to Queen Elizabeth The
Queen Mother. The Treasury and The Department have requested that the Royal Household manage this
project on their behalf.
Grant-in-Aid for the maintenance of the Occupied Royal Palaces
2003-04
Actual

2004-05
Actual

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Royal Communications
Marlborough House
Total income

16.0
1.4
17.4
0.5
0.6
18.5

14.5
1.8
16.3
0.5
0.6
17.4

15.1
2.0
17.1
0.5
0.6
18.2

15.0
2.0
17.0
0.5
0.6
18.1

15.0
2.0
17.0
0.5
0.6
18.1

Total net expenditure

17.2

17.4

17.2

17.1

16.8

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

1.0
1.2
2.2

1.0
0.8
1.8

Resources £ millions
Grant-in-Aid
Other income

Exceptional funding
Capital Fund
Queen Mother Memorial Fund
Total exceptional expenditure

Key Achievements
The Property Services Grant-in-Aid was set up on 1 April 1991 when management and operating responsibility was transferred to
the Royal Household. Over the past 14 years net cash expenditure has been reduced by 34% in absolute terms and by 66% in
real terms.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 119

ROYAL HOUSEHOLD
Performance Indicators
Fee/Work ratio
(target)

2003-04
Actual

2004-05
Actual

2005-06
Estimated

17.7%
18.0%

17.0%
18.0%

18.0%
18.0%

2003-04
Actual

2004-05
Actual

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

315
858

300
914

261
931

Visitor numbers (thousands)
Buckingham Palace
Windsor Castle

120 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

TYNE AND WEAR MUSEUMS (TWM)
Tyne & Wear Museums is a major regional museum and art gallery service. It is a joint service funded by the
five councils within the former metropolitan county of Tyne & Wear. The Councils are: Gateshead, Newcastle
upon Tyne (lead authority), North Tyneside, South Tyneside and Sunderland. A sixth partner is the University
of Newcastle upon Tyne, with which there is a management agreement in respect of the Hancock Museum.
TWM is governed by a joint museums committee, comprising 23 elected members from the constituent local
authorities. A seventh funding partner of TWM is the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS)
through annual Grant-in-Aid. TWM leads the North East Regional Museums Hub through Renaissance in the
Regions programme.
2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Grant-in-Aid1
Other operating income
Other income
Total income

1.10
4.67
7.29
13.06

1.20
5.12
5.56
11.88

1.71
5.46
5.66
12.83

1.86
5.46
6.16
13.48

2.33
5.57
5.25
13.15

Operating costs
Capital expenditure
Total expenditure

9.24
3.82
13.06

10.94
0.94
11.88

11.19
1.14
12.33

11.57
1.31
12.88

11.55
0.60
12.15

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Estimated
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

Total visitors (million)

1.34

1.67

1.60

1.58

1.56

Child Visitors (thousands)

636

823

783

770

760

Website Visits (thousands)

262

429

536

420

440

97

112

134

120

123

153

183

98

99

100

Resources £ millions

1

Includes £0.5m in 2005-06, £0.6m in 2006-07 and £1.0m in 2007-08.

Core Performance Indicators

No. of children in organised educational programmes
(thousands)
Number of C2DE visitors required to achieve an 8% increase
by 2005-06 on the 2002-03 baseline2
2

Revised from 2005-06 to reflect adult C2DE visitors only. From 2006-07 measures adults from NS-SEC socio-economic groups 5-8.

Note: Performances for 2003-04 and forward plans reflect the closure or part closure of venues during redevelopment.

Key Achievements in 2005
In 2005, the annual number of users exceeded two million for the first time ever. In-person visits accounted for 1.67 million visits,
whilst virtual visits increased by 113% to 608,677.
TWM achieved full Museums Accreditation from the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council for all its sites, bar one
(Monkwearmouth Station Museum received provisional Accreditation as it is currently closed for refurbishment).
2005 was the first full operational year for the North East Museums Regional Hub. Key facts include: the increased investment led
to the creation of 60 new posts amongst Hub partners (TWM, Beamish, The Bowes Museum and Hartlepool Museums); and 268
volunteers contributing 3,365 working days. Flagship projects include the development of a Core Museums Skills Training
Programme and the creation of Innovart, a collaborative venture between art & design teachers and museum educators. The
additional investment has led to a 24.7% increase in visits by children and young people in education, 23.1% increase in all visits
and an exponential increase in outreach engagement.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 121

TYNE AND WEAR MUSEUMS
Five TWM sites benefited from the award winning and innovative Look, Touch, Listen, Smell project which was launched in July
2005. The project increased physical and intellectual access to sites and collections for all, but in particular for blind and partially
sighted visitors and was jointly funded by the DCMS/Wolfson Foundation and the HLF.
The Laing Art Gallery was judged North East Large Visitor Attraction of the Year. During 2005, the Gallery displayed works of art by
Titian and Picasso in the Venus Rising exhibition and Damien Hirst, Grayson Perry and Tracey Emin in Revelation: Reflecting British
Art in the Arts Council Collection.
In 2005, 440,968 people visited Discovery Museum, making it the most visited museum in the region. The opening of the new
Revolutions Gallery was the latest phase of the building redevelopment. Neville Hails, one of Discovery’s museum assistants won
the individual award for Outstanding Customer Service at the North East Tourism Awards.
At the Shipley Art Gallery, a re-hang of over 80 oil paintings collection entitled The Artistic Impulse rescued works from stores for
the first time in many years. The exhibition Star Portraits, as featured in the BBC television programme of the same name, brought
record numbers of visitors during September and October.
The highlight at Segedunum Roman Fort, Baths and Museum was the collaborative exhibition with the British Museum Across the
Board – Around the World in 18 Games. Twenty-four of the famous Lewis Chessmen held centre stage in the displays, which brought
together games from around the world from the earliest times to the present day. The project was funded through the Strategic
Commissioning programme.
In July, a Harry Potter themed day at Stephenson Railway Museum attracted 1,600 visitors.
At South Shields Museum and Art Gallery, innovative projects continued to capture the imagination: Destination South Tyneside
explored the experiences of people who have arrived in the area from all over the world as well as the experience of leaving South
Tyneside to live abroad.
TimeQuest, the interactive gallery and only educational resource for archaeology of its type in the north-eastern region, reopened at
Arbeia Roman Fort following refurbishment and enlargement. 2005 was also the 28th year of continuous archaeological digging at
the site, with the local community hosting some 85 volunteers from all over the globe.
In Sunderland, Sunderland Museum and Winter Gardens was the only non-national venue to stage the BP Portrait Award exhibition,
organised by the National Portrait Gallery. Meanwhile, Monkwearmouth Station Museum closed at the end of August for a
£1 million refurbishment. Funding has been secured from the HLF, DCMS/Wolfson Foundation and Sunderland City Council.
At the Hancock Museum, undoubtedly the most important and exciting development was the Stage 1 approval of an £8.75 million
award from the HLF towards the complete redevelopment of the Museum as part of the Great North Museum project. The
development of the project also resulted in the historic decision to remove admission charges in February 2005.
Partnership working continued to be very important in 2005. TWM participated in seven Strategic Commissioning projects: Across
the Board at Segedunum in partnership with the British Museum; Engaging Refugees and Asylum Seekers at Sunderland Museum and
Winter Gardens in partnership with National Museums Liverpool; Take One Picture: North, East, South, West at the Laing Art Gallery
in partnership with the National Gallery; Portrait North East at Sunderland Museum and Winter Gardens in partnership with the
National Portrait Gallery; Image and Identity at the Shipley Art Gallery with the V&A; Evolution Workshop at the Hancock Museum
with the Natural History Museum; and Visual Dialogues at the Laing art Gallery with Tate Britain. Other partnerships included: The
Laing Art Gallery staging Stuff of Life, the fourth in the series of exhibitions with the National Gallery and Bristol’s Museums,
Galleries and Archives. (Funding has now been secured to develop the partnership for a further three years. The principal funders are
the HLF, the Esmée Fairbairn Foundation and the Northern Rock Foundation); Buried Treasure, Egypt Revealed and Changing Face
from the British Museum were displayed at the Hancock Museum; Self Portrait UK 14 -19 organised with Media 19 and the National
Portrait Galley was staged at Sunderland Museum and Winter Gardens; TWM also participated in Culture Online: Every Object Tells a
Story with the V&A, Brighton and Birmingham museums and Inspired By – with the V&A, NIACE and Museums Manchester.

TYNE AND WEAR MUSEUMS

122 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Personnel
Director
Alec Coles

Committees
Tyne and Wear Museums Joint Committee
Gateshead Council
Councillors
D Anderson
JW Hamilton
J McElroy
J Mitchinson

South Tyneside Council
Councillors
J Capstick
J Foreman
B Scorer
M Smith

Newcastle City Council
Councillors
P Allen
S Bailey
G Bell (Chair)
D Faulkner
R Morl
W Thorkildsen

Sunderland City Council
Councillors
RA Bell
KM Rolph
C Shattock
M Speding (Vice Chair)
JW Walton

North Tyneside Council
Councillors
LJ Goveas
M Huscroft
KJG Johnston
S Mortimer

Hancock Museum Management Committee
University of Newcastle upon Tyne
Dr. E.G.N. Cross (Chair)
Professor P.S. Davis
Professor C.L.J. Frid
Ms H Hunter
Ms S. Underwood

Natural History Society of Northumbria
Dr D.Gardner-Medwin
Mr I Moorhouse
Mr. D. Noble-Rollin
Dr B.J. Selman

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 123

ADVISORY NON-DEPARTMENTAL
PUBLIC BODIES
An advisory non-departmental public body (NDPB) is a body independent of government, set
up to provide expert advice and input into policy making on behalf of ministers or civil
servants. Those appointed to the body are drawn from outside the public sector.
Appointments are made by ministers, by officials on behalf of ministers, the Prime Minister,
the Queen on the advice of ministers or, in some cases, by the bodies themselves.
An advisory NDPB does not usually have its own staff or its own budget. It has a secretariat
usually provided by the sponsoring department and any costs incurred are part of the
sponsoring department’s expenditure.
The body is a standing body (i.e. in existence for more than two years) and meets at least
once a year. Ministers are ultimately answerable for the performance of advisory NDPBs.

124 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORIC WRECK SITES (ACHWS)
The Advisory Committee on Historic Wreck Sites advises the Government on designating sites of shipwrecks
of historic and archaeological importance in UK waters under the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973.

Personnel
Chairman
Tom Hassall

Start date

End date

20.06.02

20.06.06

07.07.04
01.04.98
07.07.04
01.03.02
30.06.99
28.02.99
01.06.02
06.07.04
16.02.04
14.06.04
08.10.04

06.07.08
31.03.06
06.08.08
28.02.06
30.06.07
31.03.07
31.05.06
06.07.08
28.02.08
13.06.08
08.10.08

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Secretary
Mary Gandy
Members
Dr Colin Martin
Dr Mark Redknapp
Elizabeth Blackburn QC
Stuart Bryan
Dr Lucy Blue
Robin Daniels
Alexandra Hildred
Prof Michael Collins
Suzanne Pleydell
Rear Admiral Richard Hill
Amanda Sutherland

31.03.01

30.06.03
31.03.03

Members of the committee are unpaid but may claim travel expenses.
Annual Report available from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport or English Heritage.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 125

ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE GOVERNMENT ART COLLECTION
The Advisory Committee advises the Secretary of State, through the Director of the Government Art
Collection, on acquisitions policy and on particular purchases and commissions for the Collection.

Personnel
Chairman
Julia Somerville

Start date

End date

02.09.03

01.09.07

Secretary or equivalent
Mr Malcolm Steer

ex-officio

Members
Sir Nicholas Serota
Dr Charles Saumarez-Smith
Mr Sandy Nairne
Mr Alan Davey
Ms Penny Johnson
Margot Heller
Dr Penelope Curtis
Ms Sarah Shalgosky
Mr Nick Hackworth1
Mr Richard Dorment

ex-officio
ex-officio
ex-officio
ex-officio
ex-officio
01.08.00
10.04.03
10.04.03
01.01.06
01.01.96

1

Mr Nick Hackworth replaced Mr Richard Dorment who completed the 10-year maximum term on 31.12.05

The Committee meets three times a year, and members are not remunerated.

126 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

30.07.07
09.04.07
09.04.07
30.12.09
31.12.05

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

02.08.03

01.01.99
01.01.02

ADVISORY COUNCIL ON LIBRARIES (ACL
The Advisory Council on Libraries was established under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964. The duty
of the ACL is to advise the Secretary of State upon matters connected with the provision and use of library
facilities as they think fit, and upon any questions referred to them by her. This includes advice on: taking
forward policy work; an effective performance management framework for public libraries; and the securing of
effective links between public libraries and other library sectors and stakeholders.

Personnel
Chairman
Vacant

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

Secretary
Craig Westwood
Members
Vacant

• ACL members are not remunerated for their services – they are eligible for travel and subsistence costs.
• Membership arrangements are under review, and procedure to appoint new membership is at an advanced stage at time of press.
Appointees will include public librarians and non-librarians to provide the widest range of experience.
• Appointments will be made for terms of between one and four years.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 127

ENGLAND MARKETING ADVISORY BOARD
The England Marketing Advisory Board (EMAB) was established under the Development of Tourism Act 1969
as the English Tourist Board. EMAB is responsible for overseeing the creation, development, promotion and
implementation of a marketing strategy for England. Its objective is to grow the value of the domestic market
by encouraging the British people to spend more on tourism throughout the English Regions throughout the
year. The England Domestic Marketing Strategy has the following three key aims:
• Investment to increase domestic tourism expenditure in England, by securing a positive return on
investment (ROI) throughout the period of the strategy to 2006.
• Co-ordination: to improve the co-ordination and effectiveness of England domestic tourism at the national,
regional and local levels by commitment to England’s brand and marketing strategy.
• Economic vitality: to promote sustainable English domestic tourism by achieving a greater seasonal and
rural/urban spread.

Personnel
Chairman
Mr Hugh Taylor
Members
Ms Suzanne Bond
Mr Tim Cantle-Jones
Mr Nick Cust
Mr John Govett
Sir William Lawrence OBE
Mr Brian Summers

Start date

End date

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

01.04.03

31.03.09

01.04.05

01.05.03
01.08.03
01.09.03
01.05.03
01.02.04
01.05.03

30.04.06
31.07.06
31.08.06
30.04.06
31.01.07
30.04.06

EMAB does not receive any funding. Its expenses are met entirely from VisitBritain’s financial resources.
An Annual Report is available from VisitBritain.

128 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

LEGAL DEPOSIT ADVISORY PANEL
Members of the Legal Deposit Advisory Panel (LDAP) were appointed in September 2005. The Panel was created
to advise the Secretary of State on the implementation of the Legal Deposit Libraries Act 2003, through
recommendations on the timing and content of regulations relating to the deposit of non-print material.

Personnel
Chair
Dr Ann Limb

Start date

End date

01.09.05

31.08.09

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

The Chair receives an Honorarium of £300 for each equivalent full day of work undertaken for LDAP, up to a maximum of 25 days
per annum (£7,500).
Secretary
Fran Love (DCMS)
Members
Andrew Yeates
Nina Barakzai
Trevor Fenwick
Nicholas Higham
Sally Morris
Hugh Jones
Robin Adams
Peter Fox
Simon Tanner
Adrienne Muir

01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05
01.09.05

31.08.08
31.08.09
31.08.09
31.08.08
31.08.09
31.08.08
31.08.08
31.08.09
31.08.09
31.08.08

Ex-officio members
Clive Field
Andrew Green
Martyn Wade
Angela Mills Wade
Members of the committee are unpaid but may claim travel expenses.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 129

PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The Public Lending Right (PLR) Advisory Committee advises the PLR Registrar and the Secretary of State. The
Committee reviews the operation of the PLR Scheme and makes proposals for changes to the legislation
when necessary. The Committee consists mainly of authors, along with specialists from the fields of
librarianship, publishing, and intellectual property rights.

Personnel

Start date

End date

Chairman
Mr Simon Brett

07.08.03

06.08.07

Members
Dr Maggie Gee
Mr Robert Froud
Ms Miranda McKearney
Mr Anthony Bradman
Mr Barry Turner
Ms Gill Coleridge
Dr James Parker, OBE

06.08.03
20.01.03
16.05.02
08.11.04
01.03.04
29.10.01
Ex-officio

05.08.07
19.01.07
15.05.06
07.11.08
29.02.08
28.10.07

Members of the committee are unpaid but may claim travel expenses.

130 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Date reappointed
(if applicable)

06.08.03
16.05.02

29.10.05

REVIEWING COMMITTEE ON THE EXPORT OF WORKS OF ART AND
OBJECTS OF CULTURAL INTEREST (RCEWA)
The Reviewing Committee is a non-statutory, advisory body consisting of eight permanent members
appointed by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport. It considers all cases where refusal of an
export licence for a work of art or object of cultural interest is suggested on the grounds of national
importance. The Secretariat of the Reviewing Committee is based at the Museums, Libraries and Archives
Council (MLA).
Start date
(if applicable)

End date

01.12.03

30.11.07

Members
Amanda Arrowsmith
Professor David Ekserdjian
Dr Catherine Johns
Mr Timothy Knox
Mr Martin Levy

01.02.02
14.11.02
19.02.03
14.03.02
01.03.97

31.01.09
13.11.06
18.02.07
13.03.09
28.02.07

Professor Pamela Robertson
Mr Johnny van Haeften

02.12.03
28.06.01

01.12.07
27.06.08

Personnel
Chairman
Lord Inglewood

Date reappointed

Secretaries (jobshare)
Ms Helen Loughlin
Ms Nicki Fox

01.02.06

14.03.06
01.03.00
01.03.03
01.03.05
28.06.04

Members of the Committee are unpaid but can claim travel expenses.
An Annual Report is available from The Stationery Office Limited or can be found on the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
(MLA) website: www.mla.gov.uk.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 131

SPOLIATION ADVISORY PANEL
The Spoliation Advisory Panel helps to resolve claims for cultural objects that may have been looted during the
Nazi era, between 1933-1945. The Panel is able to advise not only claimants and those who hold the items in
question in their collections, but also the Government itself. The Panel was established on 13 April 2000.

Personnel
Chairman
The Rt Hon Sir David Hirst

Start date
(if applicable)

End date

Date reappointed

13.04.00

12.04.06

13.04.04

13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00
13.04.00

12.04.07
12.04.07
12.04.07
12.04.07
12.04.06
12.04.06
12.04.07
12.04.06
12.04.07
12.04.06

13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04
13.04.04

Secretary
Hillary Bauer
Members
Peter Oppenheimer
Professor Richard Evans
Sir Donnell Deeny
Professor Peter Jones
Baroness Warnock
Professor Norman Palmer
Sir Terry Heiser
Martin Levy
Anna Southall
Dr Liba Taub

The Chairman receives a daily rate of £318 per day, based on an eight hour day. The members of the Panel receive a daily rate of
£204 each time they attend a meeting. The Panel held four meetings during 2005-06.

132 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

TREASURE VALUATION COMMITTEE
The Treasure Valuation Committee advises the Secretary of State on the fair market value of finds of treasure
from England, Wales and Northern Ireland that museums wish to acquire. It also provides advice to the
Secretary of State in cases where there may be grounds for paying the finder, or the find site owner, no
reward or a reduced reward.

Personnel
Chairman
Professor Norman Palmer

Start date
(if applicable)

End date

03.05.01

03.05.06

01.04.96
19.12.03
03.05.01
03.05.01
03.09.01

31.03.06
18.12.07
02.05.08
02.05.07
02.09.06

Date reappointed

Secretary or equivalent
Laura Dance
Members
Dr Jack Ogden
Mr Trevor Austin
Mrs May Sinclair
Mr Thomas Curtis
Dr Arthur MacGregor

01.04.01
03.05.04
03.05.05

Members of the Committee are unpaid but can claim travel expenses. An Annual Report is published each autumn.

SPONSORED BODIES REPORT 2006 133

INDEX
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORIC WRECK SITES
(ACHWS) 125
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE GOVERNMENT ART
COLLECTION 126
ADVISORY COUNCIL ON LIBRARIES (ACL) 127
ALCOHOL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH COUNCIL 7

MUSEUM OF LONDON GROUP 58
MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY IN MANCHESTER 61
MUSEUMS, LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES COUNCIL
(MLA) 63
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND THE ARTS (NESTA) 65

ARTS COUNCIL ENGLAND 8

NATIONAL GALLERY 67

BIG LOTTERY FUND 11

NATIONAL HERITAGE MEMORIAL FUND (NHMF) 69

BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION (BBC) 109

NATIONAL LOTTERY COMMISSION 71

BRITISH LIBRARY 15

NATIONAL MARITIME MUSEUM 73

BRITISH MUSEUM 19

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF SCIENCE & INDUSTRY 75

CHANNEL FOUR TELEVISION CORPORATION 110

NATIONAL MUSEUMS LIVERPOOL 78

CHURCHES CONSERVATION TRUST 22

NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY 80

COMMISSION FOR ARCHITECTURE AND THE BUILT

NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM 82

ENVIRONMENT (CABE) 24

OFFICE OF COMMUNICATIONS (OFCOM) 115

CULTURE EAST MIDLANDS (CEM) 26

PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT (PLR) 85

CULTURE NORTH EAST 28

PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 130

CULTURE NORTHWEST 29

REVIEWING COMMITTEE ON THE EXPORT OF WORKS

CULTURE SOUTH EAST 31

OF ART AND OBJECTS OF CULTURAL INTEREST

CULTURE SOUTH WEST 33

(RCEWA) 131

CULTURE WEST MIDLANDS (CWM) 35

ROYAL ARMOURIES 86

DESIGN COUNCIL 37

ROYAL HOUSEHOLD 119

ENGLAND MARKETING ADVISORY BOARD 128

SIANEL PEDWAR CYMRU (S4C) 117

ENGLISH HERITAGE 39

SIR JOHN SOANE’S MUSEUM 88

FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA) 42

SPOLIATION ADVISORY PANEL 132

GAMBLING COMMISSION 43

SPORT ENGLAND 90

GEFFRYE MUSEUM 45

TATE 92

HERITAGE LOTTERY FUND (HLF) 47

TREASURE VALUATION COMMITTEE 133

HISTORIC ROYAL PALACES 111

TYNE AND WEAR MUSEUMS (TWM) 121

HORNIMAN MUSEUM AND GARDENS 49

UK FILM COUNCIL 94

HORSERACE BETTING LEVY BOARD 51

UK SPORT 96

HORSERACE TOTALISATOR BOARD (TOTE) 113

VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM 99

IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM 52

VISITBRITAIN 102

LEGAL DEPOSIT ADVISORY PANEL 129

WALLACE COLLECTION 105

LIVING EAST 54

YORKSHIRE CULTURE 107

MILLENNIUM COMMISSION 56

134 DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

