DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the
Culture, Media and Sport Select
Committee Report into New Media
and the Creative Industries

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
July 2007

Cm 7186

£5.00

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the
Culture, Media and Sport Select
Committee Report into New Media
and the Creative Industries

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
July 2007

Cm 7186

£5.00

© Crown Copyright 2007
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged
as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee Report into
New Media and the Creative Industries
Introduction
First of all we would like to congratulate and thank the Culture, Media and Sport Select
Committee for an excellent and thorough report, highlighting the strength and vibrancy of the
UK’s creative industries.
The creative, knowledge economy is a key global driver for economic prosperity. The UK’s
creative industries are a real success story. They are one of the economy's fastest growing sectors
– contributing over £56 billion to the UK in 2004, accounting for over 7% of GDP, supporting
1.8 million jobs, and growing at an average of 5% per year between 1997 and 2004, compared
to an average of 3% for the economy as a whole during that period.
To maintain this performance it is vital that creative businesses are fully able to exploit the exciting
new media technology that has opened up access to creative content. But for business to be able
to make returns on their creativity and invest in new talent and innovation, it is also important
that they have the necessary protection.
The Committee’s report has been timely, coinciding with the Creative Economy Programme – in
particular the publication on 25th June of the Work Foundation’s report Staying Ahead: The
economic performance of the UK’s creative industries – and the work being done to implement
the recommendations of the Gowers Report on Intellectual Property.
The Work Foundation’s report examines the role of creative businesses and entrepreneurs within
the UK economy and in doing so recognises both their cultural influence and their critical
economic value. It also highlights the significance of design and innovation not only to the creative
and cultural industries, but also to the wider economy, in line with George Cox’s report on
creativity in business, the Roberts review of creativity in schools, and the Creative UK Strategy
recently published by UK Trade and Investment.
The challenges and opportunities facing new media and the creative industries, as highlighted by
the Committee, are evolving apace and it is important for Government and industry to work
together in order that we can create the right economic framework in which business can thrive.
We would welcome the Committee’s continuing interest and support for this exciting and vital
sector of the UK economy.
Government Response
1.
We believe that Creative Commons licences are a valid option for creators who make
a conscious and informed decision to make their work available for re-use. We accept that
they can in fact be a useful marketing tool, as long as licensees understand the limitations
on future commercial exploitation. Creative Commons licences should not, however, be
regarded as the norm; nor should more radical rights-free regimes. Creators are entitled to
demand payment for their product and the success of the creative industries depends on
their ability to do so. (Paragraph 60)
The Government recognises the intense debate that has surrounded the Creative Commons
licences. The debate was in part fuelled by suggestions that they were something other than
alternative licences based on copyright. In fact these licences are just one of several options for
copyright owners to consider when exploiting their works. Whether they are used in any particular
case will depend on the nature of the exposure that the creator wants, what sort of access to their
work they are prepared to give consumers, and what rights they have control over in the first
place. As with any form of licence, the licensor should be clear about the extent of both the rights
being retained and the rights being relinquished.

1

2.
Royalty levels are a commercial matter for negotiation between relevant parties. We
acknowledge that, whatever the means of distribution of their product, recording companies
incur a major part of their costs in identifying and promoting artists, the majority of which
may never provide a return on the investment. As digital distribution increases, costs are
bound to fall, as may revenues. We would expect the recording industry to ensure that there
is a fair sharing of both risk and profits with creators. (Paragraph 69)
The Government notes this recommendation, which is principally for the industry.
3.
As the strategic agency for film in the UK whose aim is to stimulate a competitive,
successful and vibrant UK film industry and culture, and with multi-million pound
Government funding, the Film Council might have been expected to have commissioned and
reported on this area [the potential for digital platforms to enhance public access to British
and specialised films] some time ago. (Paragraph 71)
The Government notes this recommendation, which is principally for the UK Film Council.
4.
There is no doubt that commercial broadcasters will come under increasing pressure
from fragmentation of audiences and of advertising revenue. We are convinced that there
will remain a market for televisual content free at the point of use but the decline in revenues
from traditional advertisements may be permanent. We believe that commercial broadcasters
will need to adopt a flexible approach and to be willing to diversify. Broadcasters are already
recognising the need to tap into the online market themselves and to make use of
opportunities presented by the development of technology, e.g. the ability to integrate
advertisements into downloads on demand. We also encourage Ofcom to take advantage of
the proposed derogation in the Audio Visual Media Services Directive, under which limited
use may be made of product placement. We will examine further the implications of the
decline in advertising revenues for the provision of public service media content by
commercial broadcasters in our forthcoming Report on this issue. (Paragraph 94)
We agree with the Committee’s analysis and look forward to their report on public service media
content. The Government will wish to consider further the use of the proposed derogation on
product placement in the Audio-Visual Media Services Directive as we approach implementation,
taking account of Ofcom’s earlier consultation on the subject.
5.
Although we will continue to listen to the arguments, we do not believe that a
persuasive case has yet been made to justify reserving spectrum for High Definition
Television following digital switchover, and we endorse Ofcom’s approach in not favouring
any particular technology or application in the framework being drawn up for re-allocation
of spectrum under the Digital Dividend Review. However, we do recognise the special case
of the programme-making and special events (PMSE) sector which risks losing access to
spectrum it has traditionally enjoyed as a result of switch-off and we believe that it is
essential that an acceptable solution to their difficulties be found. (Paragraph 100)
The Government’s policy is that future use of the spectrum released following digital switchover
should be determined through a technology-neutral auction or auctions, as the market is better
placed to decide the optimal use of this scarce resource. In developing proposals for such an
award process, we expect Ofcom to adhere to its principal duty to further the interests of citizens
and of consumers. Like Ofcom, we believe that some applications can generate social value, and
that it is important to avoid market failure so that this value can be captured. We are interested
in this issue and will continue to listen to all the relevant arguments.
We agree that the programme-making and special events (PMSE) sector appears to be in a unique
position. We welcomed Ofcom’s decision to issue a further consultation in June focusing solely
on PMSE issues, and hope that a solution can be found to these difficulties which is satisfactory
to all the parties involved, and which provides maximum value to UK citizens.

2

6.
The Digital Dividend Review is complex and its outcome will have far-reaching
consequences; we accept that Ofcom should not be pressured into taking hasty decisions.
But it should bear in mind that delays in reaching decisions in the DDR process create
uncertainty for all and can have adverse economic consequences for some. (Paragraph 101)
The Government agrees that the Digital Dividend Review is complex and welcomes the Report’s
acknowledgement of this, along with the considerable consequences of the decisions made relating
to the Review. For this reason we are reassured by Ofcom’s current indicative timetable, which
sees Ofcom issuing a policy statement and a further consultation on detailed award proposals in
late 2007, leading to a possible award process in late 2008/early 2009 – over three years before
the switchover process is completed.
7.
The new terms of trade between producers and broadcasters have swung the balance
towards producers. Steps to strengthen the ability of content originators to retain greater
control over their rights are welcome; but commissioning channels need to be able to derive
fair value for the product which they have financed, particularly as the climate for
advertising on terrestrial television becomes harsher. While we welcome the fact that
agreement has eventually been reached between producers and broadcasters, we expect that
a further review of the terms of trade will become necessary once the value of on-demand
services to broadcasters’ funding models becomes clearer—probably sooner rather than
later. (Paragraph 117)
We share the Committee’s welcome for the agreement on terms of trade between producers and
broadcasters and agree that they are likely to need to be reviewed periodically given the
importance of rights to the different sectors of our creative economy.
8.
Some of the restrictive practices described to us in evidence as being used by
broadcasters when commissioning programming and driving deals on rights for future
transmission were, if accurately reported, counter to the spirit of the Communications Act.
We believe that they are less likely to occur under the new terms of trade, although Ofcom
must remain vigilant. (Paragraph 118)
The Government notes this recommendation, which is principally for Ofcom.
9.
We welcome the commitment made by the Government to bring into force section
107A of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 and to provide £5 million to local
government to fund enforcement. These steps are long overdue. (Paragraph 132)
We are pleased that Section 107A of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 was enacted
in April this year. The allocation of £5 million to fund the new power to enforce copyright offences
has been welcomed by local authorities.
To assist local authorities to enforce the new power, the UK Intellectual Property Office, in liaison
with representatives from the creative industries, has embarked on a national training programme.
10. The Department for Constitutional Affairs should investigate reports that the award
of additional damages for infringement of intellectual property is difficult to secure. The
deterrent effect of the present law in this respect is near zero: it should be substantial, as
are some of the illicit profits being made. (Paragraph 134)
A consultation paper on the law on damages was published by the Department for Constitutional
Affairs (now the Ministry of Justice) on 4th May 2007. In accordance with the relevant
recommendation of the Gowers Review, Chapter 7 of the consultation paper seeks views on how
the system of damages works in relation to: patents; designs; trade marks and passing off; and
copyright and related rights. The consultation closes on 27th July 2007. A paper summarising the
responses to the consultation paper will be published by the Ministry of Justice in October 2007.

3

11. We therefore recommend that unauthorised copying and commercial distribution of
audiovisual content projected onto a cinema screen should be made a criminal offence.
(Paragraph 135)
The Government recognises that piracy is a growing concern and this was one of the primary
reasons that the national IP Crime Strategy was implemented in August 2004. The Gowers
Review’s report reinforced the need to continue to strengthen the IP enforcement regime.
Legislation is already in place to help deter unauthorised copying of films shown in cinemas. For
example, the commercial distribution of pirated films is a criminal offence, which can now be
enforced by Trading Standards Officers following the enactment of Section 107A in April this year.
In the interests of improving the enforcement landscape we would welcome substantive evidence
which supports the claim for a specific criminal offence for camcording in cinemas.
12. We do not believe that the present statutory exemptions from infringement of copyright
are providing clarity or confidence for users or for the creative industries, particularly in
relation to home copying. We do not believe that it is satisfactory that consumers should be
advised by the industry that they can ignore certain provisions of the existing law and not
others, and we believe that this must contribute towards a general lack of understanding
and respect for copyright law. (Paragraph 143)
13. We recommend that the Government should draw up a new exemption permitting
copying within domestic premises for domestic use (including portable devices such as MP3
players, and vehicles owned or used regularly by the household) but not onward transmission
of copied material. We also recommend that the Government should consult representatives
of the creative industries and of consumers on an ongoing basis to ensure that it can respond
appropriately. This will allow it to act more effectively and to establish where the existing
regime of exceptions is either vulnerable to abuse, failing to respond to advances in digital
technology, or unduly restrictive. (Paragraph 143)
Taking 12 & 13 together, the complexity of copyright law arises because of a need to balance
carefully rights given to creators and exceptions to those rights. We are committed to maintaining
an appropriate balance between rights holders and users, but recognise that many users in
particular are not aware of what the law actually says and, of those who are, many simply do not
care. We therefore believe that the recommendation which the Gowers report made, to introduce
a limited format-shifting exception applicable only for personal use, will help improve the position
in two ways. Firstly, the change in the law will reflect a reality recognised by industry. Secondly,
amending the law will present an opportunity, both during the consultation and in subsequent
preparation for the change, to raise awareness about copyright and to put across clear messages
to the public about what is permitted.
The Government will undertake a public consultation this Autumn about making an exception to
copyright legislation to allow format-shifting for private use. This first consultation will allow us
to gauge opinions of both rights holders and copyright users before deciding what legislative
amendments are required. A second consultation on the draft legislation will then be carried out.
This two stage consultation, and the informal discussions which have preceded it, are indicative
of the Government’s commitment to engage in ongoing dialogue with stakeholders. We recognise
the challenges and opportunities that developments in technology present and have regular
dialogues with many stakeholders, including the British Copyright Council, members of the music
industry and users of the current exceptions regime. We fully accept that this commitment should
not change.
14. We accept that home copying can damage business models. We agree with the
conclusion of the Gowers review, however, that levies are a blunt instrument for exacting
recompense, and we do not recommend that they should be imposed on either hardware or
software. (Paragraph 146)

4

We agree. Whilst the Government is aware that a levy system which places an additional charge
on certain copy-capable equipment to compensate rights holders for private copying is used in
some EU countries, it does not consider that consumers should be forced to pay more money for
buying items which may never be used for copying copyright works. For example, many
computers and blank CDs are used only for storing personal documents and photographs. We do
not believe it appropriate to penalise such uses, particularly when they are likely to have a
disproportionate effect on certain sections of society: for example, visually impaired people often
have to rely on the use of computers and recording systems for access to information for leisure,
communication and educational purposes.
15. We accept the argument, in principle, that delaying universal access to film through
the use of release windows, and holding back rights to broadcast television programming
via new media, contributes to a climate in which piracy flourishes. The film and television
industries cannot ignore this. However, we recognise that cinema exhibitors have relied on
a period of exclusivity of release to sustain their businesses. While this has declined, there
will continue to be pressure for further reductions and we believe that in future cinemas
will need to rely more and more upon providing a distinct experience and environment. The
UK Film Council should support and publicise new approaches by cinemas to retaining and
developing their audiences. (Paragraph 152)
The Government notes this recommendation, which is principally for the UK Film Council.
16. We recommend that the BBC should amend the slogan for the Creative Archive, if it
proceeds beyond the pilot phase, to convey the message to users that content should be
respected. The BBC should examine whether more can be done to oblige users of the Creative
Archive to read the terms of the licence governing use of the material before downloading
and consider what other action it can take to educate consumers about the purpose and
importance of copyright law. (Paragraph 156)
The Government notes the recommendation, which is for the BBC to consider.
17. We share the Minister’s reservations about adding copyright as a specific item to the
core curriculum. However, we believe that a less formal approach would be better and that
teachers should be encouraged to promote an understanding of copyright as it becomes
relevant, whether in music, creative writing or information technology lessons. (Paragraph
158)
We note that the Committee shares our reservations about adding copyright to what is an already
crowded curriculum. Like the Committee we believe that raising awareness of and respect for
copyright amongst students and young people can best be achieved by making it relevant to them.
This means including it within the current framework of subjects. The British Music Rights
campaign recognised this and did so in relation to music lessons, whilst the UK Intellectual
Property Office continues to do so with its Think Kit resource, aimed at business studies and
design and technology students, and its new Wallace and Gromit Primary Schools campaign.
We recognise that raising awareness is a long term aim, and is best done by all the interested
stakeholders taking a coherent approach. This is why we have set up the CREATE Group, chaired
by the UK Intellectual Property Office, with membership from DCMS, BERR, DIUS and DfCSF
and industry, which is working to take forward the IP and education agenda, using the CREATE
principles. The CREATE group takes a similar approach to the Committee in endorsing the
inclusion of copyright in lessons covering relevant subjects such as music, media and film studies.

5

18. We are in no doubt that Digital Rights Management copy control mechanisms have
damaged consumer trust and have sometimes provided a very poor deal for consumers. They
should not be allowed to operate in defiance of exemptions for unlicensed copying enshrined
in UK copyright law. We do not, however, believe that a rush to regulate is the answer,
particularly as the technology is still in an early stage of development. DRM systems have
value and can, if constantly refined, play a major part in fighting piracy. We agree with
evidence that they constitute a way ahead for protection of creative content. We believe that
DRM tools could in future allow the sale of digital files at a range of prices to reflect the
extent of reproduction permitted. (Paragraph 168)
19. We believe that it is a matter for companies to decide the extent to which they wish
to impose restrictions on the use of downloads and physical product. However, Digital Rights
Management technology must be applied with care, and the impact of any DRM tools,
whether designed for copy control or for other purposes, should be made clear to consumers
at the time of purchase. It should also be borne in mind that any excessive restriction of
consumers’ ability to copy and share content, and unwelcome consequences for consumers’
use of their own computer hardware, will only dissuade them from using the legitimate
market. DRM could, if used carelessly, be an own goal. We welcome the recent evidence that
record companies are now choosing to make available content free from DRM for
commercial reasons. (Paragraph 169)
Taking 18 and 19 together, we note the Committee’s view that Digital Rights Management (DRM)
has damaged consumer trust, sometimes resulting in a poor deal for them, and should not be
allowed to override copyright exceptions. There certainly have been instances where DRM was
used clumsily, and as a consequence the rights holders have suffered very poor publicity, but we
would agree with the Committee that use of DRM is still at an early stage, and the market should
be given the opportunity to sort this out for itself, without regulatory intervention. As the
Committee suggests, this may lead to more content being offered DRM free as well as more
flexible and imaginative use of DRM itself.
Andrew Gowers addressed the issue about information being provided to consumers, and
recommended that Government should look at whether a labeling convention, without excessive
regulation, was a way forward. We agree that the principle of consumers being provided with
sufficient information to make an informed decision is one that should be supported, and will
continue to investigate how such a convention might work in practice.
20. Internet service providers and search-based businesses have already demonstrated that
they accept the principle that access to unlicensed material on websites is undesirable and
should be prevented if at all possible. It may be impractical for such businesses to be made
legally liable for providing access to certain material, but we believe strongly that the
industry should do more to discourage piracy. We are not persuaded that an industry-funded
body with a remit to examine claims that unlicensed material is being made available on a
website cannot be made to succeed, and we believe that the industry should establish such
a body without delay. (Paragraph 175)
This is a complicated area with strong views on all sides, but there is a distinction to be drawn
between what is a criminal and what is a civil offence, and the steps that should be taken to
address each. Criminal activity, such as piracy on a commercial scale, calls for a different response
from civil infringement. It is actually the civil infringement where much of the concern rests
because of its huge cumulative effect, but there are encouraging signs that the ISPs and the rights
holders are having fruitful discussions on a way forward. This was something that Andrew Gowers
also recommended, and we will be monitoring this closely to ensure that a practical, fair and
effective industry protocol is established.

6

21. We do not find the representations made by the publishing industry about Internet
news portals to be convincing. Newspaper websites on the Internet are part of a public arena;
there is no legal bar to providing an indexing service; and we have yet to be persuaded that
the establishment of Internet news portals is causing damage to commercial publishing
enterprises. We recommend that the onus should remain with firms to opt out of Internet
search engine listings rather than opt in. (Paragraph 181)
We acknowledge that activities such as indexing may serve useful public functions by enabling
public access to and dissemination of information. We are nevertheless aware of the concerns
raised by publishers and would urge both sides to continue to work together to resolve specific
issues.
22. We have yet to see whether the new arrangements for governance of the BBC will
inspire any greater confidence in the commercial sector that the BBC will take account of
its privileged position in the market when considering new projects. The onus is on the BBC
Trust to acknowledge that there is potential for the BBC’s activities to have a damaging
impact on the commercial sector and that different elements of its plans have differing
impacts, and we believe that the BBC must be scrupulous in addressing all the relevant
markets and impacts in its Public Value Tests. It is recognised that the Trust will need to
make fine judgements about conducting Public Value Tests from time to time (as well as
Ofcom with respect to Market Impact Assessments), but a sensible approach would be,
“When in doubt, test.” Public and commercial confidence in self-regulation by the BBC
Trust will be boosted by evidence that the Trust will act, as it has done in the case of BBC
Jam: we see this as an encouraging sign of real change. (Paragraph 195)
These comments are for the BBC Trust to consider. The Royal Charter places the Trust under a
specific obligation to have regard to the competitive impact of the BBC's activities on the wider
market. The incoming Chairman has stated that under his leadership the Trust will continue to
ensure that the BBC operates fairly, that it is aware of its own strength in the market, listens to
the commercial sector and responds by making changes where doing so will ensure better public
value.
23. We agree with the approach taken by the Government and by Ofcom in negotiations
with other EU Member States and with the European Commission on the draft Audio Visual
Media Services Directive. The Government took a pragmatic decision to support the
regulation of on-demand broadcast services, although we accept that there is in any case
some logic underlying such a policy. It must be recognised, however, that the EU has chosen
to extend the scope of new media regulation in ways that may disadvantage it in a globally
competitive and increasingly technologically borderless world, and could see some existing
businesses as well as start-ups in future choose to operate from more liberal jurisdictions.
We believe that any such regulation of on-demand services should be self-regulation, both
by the industry and within the home. In line with its duty to promote media literacy, Ofcom,
with the assistance of all broadcasters and media regulators, should seek to increase public
awareness that the protection of children from harmful content accessed via both new and
traditional media will become increasingly a responsibility for parents. (Paragraph 211)
We believe that the risks noted by the Committee have been minimised in the text of the Directive
on which the Ministerial Council reached political agreement on May 24th; the Directive is likely
to be adopted later this year. The new Directive will apply to television services and to on-demand
services which are similar to television (that is, video-on-demand services) only.
The Government has made clear its intention to implement the Directive provisions applying to
on-demand services by means of co-regulation, as explicitly encouraged in the text.
Beyond this, we entirely agree that self-regulation should be the preferred option for on-demand
services, coupled as the report suggests with increasing public awareness of the role of parents
in ensuring that children are protected from harmful content.

7

24. We recommend that proposals for policy development in the forthcoming Green Paper
on Creative Industries should be accompanied by a strategy for research, to include an
assessment of the investment climate for start-up businesses in new media sectors.
(Paragraph 221).
26. We welcome the intention to publish a Green Paper on the Creative Industries. We
believe that it will mark a long overdue recognition of the importance of their role in the
UK economy. (Paragraph 225)
Taking 24 and 26 together, the Committee will have noted that the Work Foundation published
its report to Government, “Staying Ahead: The economic performance of the UK’s creative
industries”, on 25th June 2007. The Report raises many issues for Government, including those
relating to evidence, data and research. The Government will consider this report and any feedback
we receive from stakeholders over the summer. We plan to publish the Creative Economy
Programme Green Paper later this year.
25. We request that the Government provide this information [on the results of the
Creative Economy Task Force launched in 1998, together with actions which have been
undertaken in its wake] in its response to this report. (Paragraph 224)
As stated in the Government’s submission to the Committee, the creative industries continue to
be an important and dynamic sector of the UK’s economy. Since the establishment of the Creative
Industries Task Force and the publication of the first Mapping Document in 1998, employment
has grown from around 1.5 million to over 1.8 million; the contribution to the economy has
doubled from 4% to 8%; and between 1997 and 2004 the creative industries as a whole averaged
6% growth. That is around twice that of the economy as a whole.
During this period the main issues impacting on the sector have been common to all industries:
a stable economy; favourable exchange rates; removal of unnecessary regulation; and a range of
employment issues. The Government, through the Creative Industries Task Force, identified six
areas in which the creative industries had a particular interest, and in which they felt that
government could help. These were:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Access to finance;
Intellectual property rights;
Exports;
Providing a skills base;
The impact of new technology; and
Creativity

The Government and industry have made significant progress in creating the right economic
framework in which the creative industries can flourish. However, whilst the core issues remain
the same for many of the UK’s successful creative industries, the technology and the business
models at the centre of their activity continue to evolve apace.
On the key areas highlighted by the Task Force, Government and industry stakeholders have made
considerable progress.

8

Access to finance. Getting the finance necessary to grow their businesses can be a real problem
for many small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs). This is certainly an issue for the creative
industries because they tend to have a higher than normal proportion of small firms. Generally
speaking, creative industries SMEs need the same advice and support as SMEs in other sectors
– such as that available from Business Links and under the Small Firms Loan Guarantee Scheme.
Figures suggest that SMEs in the creative industries have not been slow in taking advantage of
the support available, but at the same time there does seem to be evidence that some businesses
do not see the relevance to them of the generic help on offer. We may need to see how we can
reach out to these businesses more effectively and draw them into mainstream support services.
In order to address this information gap we devised a “Money Map” that collected into one place
information on access to finance assistance available. We are also considering how we can best
market our help to firms in the creative industries who may still not recognise the relevance of
the generic support available.
We have also carried out a study into the problems faced by SMEs in the music sector in accessing
finance and acquiring business skills. Among other things, the results of this study indicated that
music industry SMEs possess relatively low levels of skill in financial and business management,
and that this is likely to be a contributory factor when assessing the difficulties many face in
securing debt finance. These findings will be reflected in our development of the proposed Green
Paper on the Creative Economy.
Intellectual property rights. The UK Intellectual Property Office (UK-IPO) plays a central role
in our efforts to promote the Knowledge Economy as IP underpins so much innovation. To reflect
this, the UK-IPO has widened its remit beyond the administration of the IP system to becoming
the hub for IP enforcement. The UK-IPO also supports innovation through a comprehensive
programme of IP education and awareness initiatives. For example, the educational resource
‘Think Kit’, has been requested by over 80% of UK Secondary Schools. This resource is teaching
children about the value of IP in a positive way, making it relevant to their lives. Furthermore,
the Government is working closely with the creative industries, through the CREATE group, to
look at how best to raise awareness of the value of IP amongst all stakeholders.
The UK-IPO has worked closely with industry stakeholders to ensure that its policy initiatives
and its negotiations with European partners take account of the needs of all the UK’s sectors,
including the creative industries. The Government, through the Creative Industries IP Forum,
which published its report in October 2005, and through its sponsorship of a Creative Economy
Conference within the UK’s Presidency of the EU, has continued to work closely with the creative
industries in order to help address its concerns.
New industry stakeholder groups have been formed to work with and implement the Forum’s
recommendations, including the UK-IPO’s National IP Crime Strategy and its associated prevention
and enforcement groups. We have brought stakeholders together in the IP Crime Group. Group
members – including the Police, the Trading Standards Agency and creative industries’
representatives – are working together to ensure that criminal activity, from the large importers
to the small dealers, is dealt with in a co-ordinated way. This collaborative approach is already
producing results. The Government has put in place a structure for pooling information and
identifying priority areas to target enforcement action.
The Gowers Review of Intellectual Property has also provided an opportunity for a more coherent
debate on a range of issues around copyright and IP generally, which is covered in the response
to Recommendation 27.
Exports. The Government has continued to work with sector advisory groups – the Creative
Exports Group, Design Partners, and the Performing Arts International Development Group – to
consider how best to tackle barriers to trade, to identify priority territories and to inform
Government policy.

9

Since the establishment of the Task Force, UK Trade and Investment (UKTI) has doubled its
investment in the creative industries. Exports from the creative industries have grown from £7.5bn
in 1998 to £13 billion in 2004, equating to 4.3% of all goods and services exported.
UKTI has identified the creative industries sector as one of five priorities for input and investment
by Government, given its potential in world markets. A commitment has been made to develop
– in collaboration with relevant bodies from the private and public sectors – a five-year marketing
strategy to help boost the sector’s share of the global market for creative services and products,
and to attract a greater flow of inward investment.
Providing a skills base. A series of Government White and Green papers over the last three years
has reflected a renewed policy focus on education and skills as major drivers for economic
development and growth. As part of this, the need not just to stimulate and nurture creativity in
all young people, but also to give appropriate entrepreneurial and business skills to those who
wish to pursue a relevant career has been fully recognised.
Creativity is a key part of the Early Years foundation stage and the Primary and Secondary
National Strategies. The recent Roberts Review further noted that the basic framework of creative
provision in primary and secondary education is strongly supported by a large number of creative
organisations and agencies. Programmes such as Creative Partnerships, Renaissance in the
Regions, the Arts Award, First Light, and Youth Music, give young people the chance to explore
and develop their creative skills.
A new DCMS/DCSF Creative and Cultural Education Advisory Board – chaired by Paul Roberts
– has been established to take this approach to the next stage, helping to build strong and
sustainable connections between the creative and cultural educational sectors.
In order that young people are given the skills that they might build a career based on their
creative skills, all schools with Key Stage 4 students receive funding for Enterprise Education,
including the development of innovation, creativity and the drive to make ideas happen.
It remains true that employers from the creative, media and IT sectors often claim that courses
in their subject areas do not equip students with the intellectual, specialist or transferable skills
they need to pursue careers in those industries. Evidence from the Creative and Cultural Skills
Council demonstrates that, across the whole range of creative/cultural organisations, employers
see new job applicants lacking in the appropriate skills (although they do not lack qualifications).
The new 14-19 Diplomas in Creative and Media, Construction and the Built Environment, and
IT form a critical part of this pathway. The 14-19 Diplomas will blend general education and
applied learning to provide a motivating and challenging programme of study, developing
transferable skills that meet employers’ needs and ensuring clear progression routes into and
beyond the Diploma.
Impact of new technology. In the context of the Creative Industries Forum on Intellectual
Property, we carried out some interesting work in this area, including producing a report on the
impact of the Internet, and also looking at how business models were evolving in the digital age.
We have also made a significant contribution to the Technology Strategy Board’s programme,
highlighting the importance of the creative and media sectors, and their high level of innovation.
This has resulted in a number of calls for proposals that are of direct relevance to the creative
and media sectors, and it is excellent news that a Knowledge Transfer Network is being set up
for the creative industries which will allow them to co-operate much more effectively on
technological challenges and opportunities. However, we have also recognised that there is a
limited role for Government in this area – industry itself is more than capable of making its own
assessment, and acting accordingly.

10

Creativity. In addition to the work that has been carried out in the education and skills arena,
the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, commissioned Sir George Cox, Chair of the Design
Council, to undertake a review of creativity in business. Sir George published his report in October
2005, and made a number of recommendations, which the Government accepted in principle.
The review considered how to raise design awareness and the potential benefits of design for
SMEs, particularly in modern manufacturing, as well as the steps needed to ensure that SMEs
are able to draw on the UK's world-leading creative skills. It also examined how links can be
improved between universities and colleges, and SMEs.
Significant progress has been made in the implementation of all the recommendations of the Cox
Review and achievements in the areas of education and the design for business programme were
recognised in the 2006 Pre-Budget Report.
27. We believe that the Gowers Review of Intellectual Property was timely. We hope that
it will help to galvanise the Government into action in improving enforcement of copyright
law and amending it where necessary. However, we note that a number have expressed
disappointment at its findings. (Paragraph 230)
The Government is committed to taking forward those recommendations of the
Gowers Review for which it is responsible and an implementation plan (available at
http://www.ipo.gov.uk/policy/policy-issues/policy-issues-gowers.htm) has been put in place to
ensure this happens. Some recommendations have already been successfully implemented. For
example, Trading Standards Officers now have the power to enforce copyright offences with £5
million allocated to fund this new power, and IP crime has been recognised as an area for Police
action in the updated National Community Safety Plan.
The recommendations on copyright law and enforcement have been generally well received by
stakeholders across the board, but as the Committee notes some have expressed disappointment
at its findings. In an area such as copyright law, with disparate and sometimes conflicting
consumer and rights holders interests, this is to be expected. The recommendations on copyright
exceptions are part of a balanced package of recommendations designed to serve the interests of
all users of the IP system. The Government is confident that these recommendations can be
implemented in a way that does not damage the interests of rights holders and will consult with
stakeholders on implementation options.
28. We recommend that the Government should press the European Commission to bring
forward proposals for an extension of copyright term for sound recordings to at least 70
years, to provide reasonable certainty that an artist will be able to derive benefit from a
recording throughout his or her lifetime. (Paragraph 236)
The Government appreciates the work of the Committee and the deliberation it has given to this
subject. As the Committee noted, the independent Gowers Review also considered this issue in
detail and recommended that the European Commission retain a term of protection for sound
recordings and performers of 50 years. The Review undertook a detailed analysis of all the
arguments put forward, including the moral arguments regarding the treatment of performers. It
concluded that an extension would not benefit the majority of performers, most of whom have
contractual relationships requiring their royalties be paid back to the record label. It also concluded
that an extension would have a negative impact on the balance of trade and that it would not
increase incentives to create new works. Furthermore, it considered not just the impact on the
music industry but on the economy as a whole, and concluded that an extension would lead to
increased costs to industry, such as those who use music – whether to provide ambience in a
shop or restaurant or for TV or radio broadcasting – and to consumers who would have to pay
royalties for longer. In reaching such conclusions, the Review took account of the question of
parity with other countries such as the US, and concluded that, although royalties were payable
for longer there, the total amount was likely to be similar – or possibly less – as there were fewer
revenue streams available under the US system.

11

An independent report1, commissioned by the European Commission as part of its ongoing work
in reviewing the copyright acquis, also considered the issue of term. It reached the same overall
conclusion on this matter as the Gowers Review.
Taking account of the findings of these reports, which carefully considered the impact on the
economy as a whole, and without further substantive evidence to the contrary, it does not seem
appropriate for the Government to press the Commission for action at this stage.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID5604607 07/07 375268 19585
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

1

The Recasting of Copyright and Related Rights for the Knowledge Economy, November 2006, Institute for Information Law,
University of Amsterdam.

12

ISBN 978-0-10-171862-2

9 780101 718622

