DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the Culture, Media and
Sport Select Committee Inquiry into
Call TV quiz shows
Session 2006-07

Presented to Parliament by
the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
26 March 2007

Cm 7072

£5.00

© Crown Copyright 2007
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

Government Response to the Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee Inquiry into Call TV quiz shows
Introduction
1.
The Government welcomes the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee’s report
on Call TV quiz shows. We are pleased to be able to respond to the Committee’s report on
this issue which is both timely and important, particularly given the current problems
experienced by this sector.
2.
The Government remains extremely concerned about recent reports that have
highlighted continued failures in the operation of premium rate services (PRS) across a
range of interactive programmes. Failures of this kind risk damaging the public’s trust and
confidence in both broadcasters and premium rate services and raise concerns about
consumer protection.
3.
The Government recognises that interactive programming is popular but it is
essential that broadcasters ensure that such services can be trusted, that consumers are
clear about the rules governing such programmes and that service providers are able to
respond in a timely and effective way when problems arise. The tradition of broadcasting
in this country is founded on the high degree of trust between broadcasters and their
audiences and it is vital that broadcasters do not lose this.
4.
The Government therefore expects the highest levels of probity in the operation of
premium rate services and has looked to the regulators, Ofcom and ICSTIS, to take swift
action. In response Ofcom and ICSTIS, following extensive review and investigation, will
be announcing significantly strengthened regulation of these services imminently.
5.
ICSTIS has also set out a range of further actions to address the concerns raised.
This has included asking all broadcasters to carry out a review of their current and
forthcoming participation TV programming to ensure there is no risk of consumer harm.
In addition, ICSTIS is introducing systematic monitoring and inspections to ensure
services are being run as they should be. It is also proposing a licensing regime for
premium rate service providers which will be introduced within 3 months.
6.
Furthermore, Ofcom has announced that, in addition to investigating specific cases,
it will be undertaking an inquiry into the apparent systematic failures of compliance in this
area. We understand that the inquiry will look into:●

Consumer protection issues and audiences’ attitudes to the use of premium rate
services in television programmes;

●

The benefits and risks to broadcasters in the use of premium rate services in
programmes;

●

The respective compliance and editorial responsibilities of broadcasters, producers
and telecoms network operators and others involved in those programmes;

The effectiveness of broadcasters’ and telecoms operators’ internal compliance
procedures, guidelines and arrangements to ensure compliance with Ofcom and
ICSTIS codes.
The inquiry will also propose recommendations on actions necessary to restore confidence
and trust.
●

1

7.
The Government will continue to work closely with the regulators and we await the
outcome of these new measures with the expectation that they will provide effective
regulation of this sector – ensuring that the highest standards are operated for all premium
rate services and that consumers are fully protected. However, these services remain under
close scrutiny and the Government is prepared to take further action if it believes that the
regulators do not have sufficient powers in this area.
●

(1) We understand that ICSTIS's conclusions [from its review of the sector]
are imminent, and we urge the Gambling Commission to publish its own
findings as soon as possible. (Paragraph 25)

8.
ICSTIS published the results of its recent research into Call TV quiz shows on 29
January 2007. ICSTIS also launched a public consultation addressing many of the
concerns raised in the Committee’s report and aimed at strengthening the rules across the
sector. The consultation closed on 12 March 2007 and we now await ICSTIS’s proposals
for action.
9.
In response to a number of complaints1 recently received by ICSTIS concerning the
use of premium rate services in all participation programming, not just Call TV quiz
shows, ICSTIS held a meeting with broadcasters on 8 March 2007. As a result of that
meeting ICSTIS set out a range of actions aimed at restoring public trust and confidence
in these services. These included:●

Asking all broadcasters and their partners to carry out a review of their current and
forthcoming participation TV programming to ensure there is no risk of consumer
harm;

●

The introduction of systematic monitoring by ICSTIS and inspections to ensure
services are being run as they should;

●

An expectation that service providers would publish complete, accurate and easily
understood rules for all competition services; and

●

The introduction of a licensing regime for all premium rate service providers
operating participation TV services within three months. Such a licensing system
will define where responsibility for compliance with the ICSTIS Code of Practice
lies so that viewers can have absolute confidence in services. As part of
establishing a licensing regime, ICSTIS will explore with the industry the benefit
of introducing a trust mark or quality standard to build long-term public
confidence in services.

10. We share ICSTIS’s concern that the highest standards are operated for Call TV
programmes. We welcomed ITV’s announcement on 5 March 2007 that it had appointed
Deloitte as independent auditors to conduct a complete review of all premium rate
interactive services in ITV programmes including a retrospective review of premium
interactive services on ITV programmes over the past two years. We understand that ITV
will make the findings of the review public.
11. In addition, we understand that the BBC is reviewing the process for conducting live
competitions on CBBC television and editorial control in live studios. There will also be
intensive staff training on these issues. Furthermore, there will be an independent review
of the circumstances surrounding the problem with a competition on Blue Peter last year
and the actions arising from it.
1

ICSTIS is currently formally investigating Channel 4’s Richard and Judy Show, the BBC’s Saturday Kitchen
and ITV1's X Factor.

2

12. We recognise the popularity of these services and regard it of paramount importance
that broadcasters are seen to be trustworthy, that consumers are clear about the rules
governing such services and that broadcasters are able to respond in a timely and effective
way when problems arise.
13. The Gambling Commission has received over fifty responses to its consultation on
prize competitions and will be issuing its findings in late spring.
(2) It is intensely frustrating that uncertainty about whether programmes
should or should not be regulated as lotteries under current law is unlikely to
be resolved and that shows’ status under current law will not be determined.
(Paragraph 26)
14. The Government recognises this frustration. We strengthened the definition of a
lottery in the Gambling Act 2005 to reduce the scope for uncertainty and the new
arrangements are due to come into force on 1 September 2007.
●

(3) With some regret, we agree with the Gambling Commission that there is
little point in pursuing in the courts cases concerning the status of Call TV
quiz shows under legislation which is soon to expire. (Paragraph 26)
15. We agree with the Committee’s assessment of the Gambling Commission’s view.
The strengthened definition of a lottery that we have included in the Gambling Act 2005,
and the strengthened powers of the Gambling Commission to investigate and prosecute
illegal lotteries once the new law comes into force, are intended to address this difficulty.
●

(4) We hope that the Gambling Act 2005 will prove to be a more useful tool
than current legislation in clarifying the status of Call TV quiz shows. We do
not take this for granted, as the new Act was drafted before Call TV quiz
shows – very much a hybrid creation – became established in broadcasting
schedules. We believe that fresh uncertainties in relation to Call TV quiz
shows will arise under the new law and will be dispelled only once case law has
been established. (Paragraph 27)
16. Ultimately, only the courts can determine what is or is not an illegal lottery.
However, the Gambling Commission has already consulted on its view that the way in
which a number of TV quizzes currently operate could be caught by the new definition and
that, if this is the case, they would have to change the way they operate in order to comply
with the new rules.
●

●

17.

(5) We believe that Call TV quiz shows generally look and feel like gambling,
whether or not they will fall within the definition of gambling under the
Gambling Act 2005. The chance element, in whether or not a caller gets
beyond the first stage, is an integral part of the format: it generates repeat
calls and further revenue. Without it, we doubt that the format would be as
attractive to broadcasters. We do not see why, just because a free entry route
might exist, those who pay a premium rate to enter a game in which the first
element is entirely one of chance are doing anything other than gambling. Had
the Call TV quiz show format been widespread when the Gambling Bill was
being drafted and debated, we would have recommended that the definition
of gambling be drawn so as to cover viewers who pay to participate in such
shows. (Paragraph 28)
We agree that some TV quizzes share many of the characteristics of gambling.

3

18. However, it is central to the definition of a lottery under the Gambling Act that you
must pay to take part. If you are not required to pay to enter, or have an option to enter
which is publicised just as prominently and is no less convenient than the paid entry route,
that is not classified as a lottery under existing law or the new Gambling Act. It has never
been policy to require the alternative entry route to be entirely free: it is reasonable to
require someone to pay the cost of communicating their entry under the alternative route.
This should not amount to another payment to enter. Under the new Act, the cost of the
alternative route must be either the cost of an ordinary 1st or 2nd class letter, or be no more
expensive or less convenient than the paid route (sending a letter). It must also be well
publicised. There has been concern that the opportunity to participate in Call TV quiz
shows through alternative routes has not been adequately publicised and so has been under
used. The Gambling Commission is looking at the alternative entry routes used by TV
quizzes, in light of these new requirements.
19. If a requirement to pay was not part of the definition of a lottery, a free draw, like a
lucky dip at a child’s birthday party, would constitute gambling.
(6) It seems to us that Call TV quiz shows should constitute gaming under the
Gambling Act 2005, and DCMS and the Gambling Commission should
consider this as a matter of urgency. (Paragraph 29)
20. There is a long-standing distinction in law between “games” and “prize
competitions”. In the Department’s view the sort of arrangements offered by Call TV quiz
shows constitute competitions and not gaming. If they constitute gambling at all, they are
lotteries, or sometimes betting (but not games of chance).
●

21. Gaming has long been understood in law to refer to games, which could include
recognised gambling games like roulette, poker and bingo, but equally could apply to
board and other games like Scrabble, Monopoly and snap, all of which involve a degree of
chance.
22. There is a qualitative difference between games like this and competitions which
involve a test of skill (e.g. answering a question in a quiz, completing a crossword puzzle),
and which may then be determined by chance (by selecting the winning entry from a hat)
or complete guesswork (e.g. guessing how many sweets there are in a jar).
23. People calling a television station to enter a competition are not playing a game of
chance merely because it is a matter of chance whether or not their telephone call is
answered (whether they get the opportunity to answer the question). It is merely the first
stage in the competition, and a pre-requisite to them entering. They are paying for the
opportunity to participate. In some circumstances, the payment for this opportunity will
amount to a lottery.
●

4

(7) We commend the operators who have voluntarily introduced practices
intended to help viewers who make repeated premium rate calls appreciate
how much they are spending. We recommend that ICSTIS commission or
carry out research into the effectiveness of alerts and limits on the number of
calls, particularly (in co-operation with consumer bodies) among individuals
who have got into debt. ICSTIS should consider making it a requirement for
quiz show operators to take steps to ensure that callers are aware of how much
they are spending. (Paragraph 38)

24. The ICSTIS review, published on 29 January 2007, included details of recent
research and monitoring undertaken into the operation of Call TV quiz services. As a result
of this review ICSTIS has consulted on proposals to impose a requirement on operators to
provide announcements to callers at each £10 step they spend to ensure that they are aware
of their overall level of expenditure. We welcome the ICSTIS consultation on this proposal.
(8) Work should be undertaken to assess the scale of addiction to participation
in Call TV quiz shows. Given the Gambling Commission’s responsibility
under the Gambling Act 2005 for protecting vulnerable persons from being
harmed or exploited by gambling, we believe that this would be an exercise
appropriate to the Gambling Commission. We also recommend that
broadcasters should display the telephone number for GamCare at regular
intervals. (Paragraph 40)
25. The Gambling Commission has powers to advise on issues relating to problem
gambling only, and not on prize competitions which may be causing problems. In view of
the obvious parallels with problem gambling, we have asked the Gambling Commission to
use its expertise in this area to assist the broadcasting and premium rate regulators in
developing their own monitoring arrangements and protections.
●

26. However, where the arrangements being offered do amount to lotteries, rather than
competitions, then the Commission has full powers to prosecute and shut down anyone
who does not have the required licences or permission to run the lottery, and who acts in
breach of the rules applying to lotteries.
(9) We welcome Ofcom's finding, in response to a complaint, that ITV had
conducted a competition unfairly and had been in breach of Rule 2.11 of the
Broadcasting Code. (Paragraph 43)
27. We agree with the Committee and welcome this example of effective regulatory
intervention.
●

(10) Some methodologies used for puzzles on Call TV quiz shows are not
obvious. We believe that this is tolerable as long as viewers are made aware
there is a cryptic element: but this is currently not made clear. Guidance from
Ofcom on the issue is sound but does not go far enough. We recommend that
Ofcom should require broadcasters to inform viewers that puzzle solutions
may not be as simple as they seem. We believe that checks by an independent
third party on proposals for new puzzle types and on each puzzle for
conformity with agreed rules are valuable in building confidence in the
propriety of the games. They are also in the industry’s own interests. If there
is continued evidence of abuse and significant numbers of complaints about
games methodologies, Ofcom should consider making it obligatory for all
broadcasters of Call TV quiz shows to verify games with a third party and
lodge solutions with them to prevent underhand changes being made while
the show is on air. We recommend that Ofcom should consider carefully
whether operators should be required to broadcast not just the solutions but
also a brief explanation as to how they are arrived at. (Paragraph 48)
28. Ofcom currently requires broadcasters not to mislead viewers about the difficulty or
cryptic nature of a competition.
●

29. In applying the general standards set out in the Communications Act, Ofcom’s focus
is primarily aimed at outcomes – what is broadcast – rather than process. For instance,
there is a requirement for news programmes to report with “due accuracy” – but Ofcom
does not stipulate how that should be achieved, e.g. by consulting a third party.

5

30. The Committee have recommended that Ofcom require broadcasters to inform the
audience when a competition is cryptic. We have discussed this possibility with Ofcom,
but its view is that this would be an impossible regulatory task since there is no clear
consensus on what would constitute a particularly cryptic or difficult solution.
31. Ofcom does not mandate that broadcasters lodge their quiz answers with a third
party. Ofcom does, however, require that broadcasters are able to demonstrate that a) the
answer has not been changed; and b) that the methodology is fair. Nevertheless, Ofcom has
agreed that, as the Committee has proposed, if there is systematic abuse in this area, it
would consider creating new rules.
32. Ofcom currently requires the solution to quizzes to be broadcast, but not the
methodology. Nevertheless, when Ofcom receives a complaint concerning this issue, it
does insist that the broadcaster provide it with the methodology, so it can, as an
independent regulator, verify the answer and validation process. Consideration would be
given to the need to offer additional guidance on the methodology used should that be
deemed necessary at a later date.
(11) We are surprised that there have been so few complaints in Ofcom’s
Broadcast Bulletins about games methodology or about the obscurity of
answers. On balance, unless there is a significant drop in confidence in the
integrity of Call TV quiz programmes, we accept that Ofcom’s role in
ensuring fairness should continue to be primarily one of responding to
complaints rather than taking a proactive stance. We recommend, however,
that Ofcom should publish periodic reports on the findings of its exercises in
monitoring Call TV quiz programmes. Ofcom should in particular watch for
any sign that top prizes are consistently going unclaimed because they are
associated with puzzles which are so obscure that no viewers solve them.
(Paragraph 50)
33. As part of its recent research ICSTIS undertook extensive monitoring of the way
Call TV quiz shows operate; ICSTIS also necessarily undertakes monitoring as part of its
general regulatory process.
●

34. Any complaints about the difficulty or obscurity of a quiz answer are investigated by
Ofcom and the adjudications published, an approach the Committee endorses. Ofcom has
stated that the process of investigating complaints does lead to many hours of
programming being examined.
35. The regulators have no evidence of top prizes consistently going unclaimed, but they
have said that if any such suggestion should arise they would investigate.
(12) We signal our strong view that any practice of misleading viewers about
call volumes or of blocking calls would be more than unfair: it would be
fraudulent and should be punished under criminal law. It would also be a
disgrace to the Call TV quiz industry. (Paragraph 52)
36. The ICSTIS review, published on 29 January 2007, did not find any evidence of
unlawful practices. However, the review did uncover evidence which highlighted the need
for consumers to be given more information about the cost of taking part and the element
of chance involved. The ICSTIS consultation therefore proposed to refine the existing
rules to ensure greater transparency for consumers and to encourage best practice in the
sector. If Ofcom or ICSTIS find any evidence of misleading practice they can act.
●

6

37. ICSTIS has made clear, publicly, that where evidence of fraud or other criminal
practice comes to light, it will not hesitate to pass on that information to the police. The
City of London Police have already investigated one case of alleged fraud by a Call TV
quiz service. It was decided by the CPS that there were insufficient grounds on which to
bring charges.
(13) We accept the statement by ITV that the number of callers being charged
for calls made after they have exceeded call limits set by broadcasters and who
therefore cannot participate is very small. Nonetheless, it is unacceptable in
principle that such callers should continue to be charged, particularly when
they do not understand the futility of such calls. We welcome the undertaking
by ICSTIS that it will investigate the practice of continuing to charge. We find
it difficult to believe that there is no suitable way of preventing such calls from
being charged, and we urge BT to assist in finding a solution. In the
meantime, customers should be refunded the cost of any calls made which
have been blocked from entering the competition. (Paragraph 56)
38. The ICSTIS consultation on Call TV quiz services identified the technological
problems associated with resolving this issue. ICSTIS has therefore sought more
information about the extent of the problem and how best to resolve it. ICSTIS is
committed to keeping this issue under review, but recognises that the technical solutions
may not be straightforward. However, both Ofcom and ICSTIS have agreed with the
Committee that it is unacceptable for callers who have been barred from entering a
competition, because they have spent too much money, to be charged.
●

(14) We believe that there is scope for raising the standards which
broadcasters should meet in presenting information on the cost of
participation on-screen, possibly by prescribing the balance to be maintained
between that information and the premium rate number. (Paragraph 62)
39. The current ICSTIS Statement of Expectations sets out rules requiring operators to
provide spoken and on-screen information about the cost of participation. However, the
ICSTIS consultation has proposed to strengthen these rules by making it a requirement for
operators to provide cost information at intervals of no more than 10 minutes to ensure
viewers fully understand the cost of participating in a Call TV quiz show. We welcome the
ICSTIS consultation on this proposal.
●

(15) We accept that there may be practical difficulties for operators in
displaying a figure purporting to show the odds of any viewer getting through
to the studio by making a call at that particular moment, but we believe that
they are not insurmountable. We are firmly of the view that there should be
more transparency about the factual information on which a calculation of
the odds would be based. (Paragraph 65)
40. ICSTIS has stated that improved transparency to consumers about the chances
involved in participating in Call TV quiz services is needed. The recent ICSTIS
consultation therefore sought views on practical ways in which this might be achieved and
we look forward to their proposals.
●

●

(16) We recommend that broadcasters should be required to display some
recent historical information about volume of incoming calls, with an
indication of the odds of being connected to the studio. The operators and
regulators should together devise a model for prescribing what information
should be provided and how often. We acknowledge that considerable care
will need to be taken to ensure that the information given to viewers will
indeed increase transparency. (Paragraph 68)
7

41. As noted above, ICSTIS is considering the responses to its recent consultation on
practical ways to increase transparency to consumers about the chances of getting through
to the studio.
(17) While it is right and proper that operators should be able to ban
participants caught cheating from further participation, we believe that any
participant who has been banned should be given full information on the
reasons why the ban has been imposed. (Paragraph 69)
42. The problem in the case presented to the Committee showed the need for
participants to be clear about the Terms and Conditions which apply, and specifically
whether a large win would lead to a ban on participation. Ofcom has agreed that the
Broadcasting Code, which covers all broadcast competitions, might be strengthened to
require that the Terms and Conditions of any competition clearly state the grounds on
which participants could be banned from further participation. ICSTIS has also made clear
that all providers will review their Terms and Conditions to ensure they are complete,
accurate and easily understood.
●

(18) We welcome the recognition by regulators that close co-operation is
needed in the Call TV quiz sector. Given the distinct areas of expertise of each
of the regulators, we believe there should continue to be a regulatory role for
each. However, we recommend that there should be one regulator, in our view
Ofcom, taking the lead and orchestrating oversight. We believe that members
of the public have no clear idea which body they should complain to if they
have concerns, and we recommend that a single body should take
responsibility for registering all complaints and forwarding them, as
necessary, to the appropriate body. This would allow regulators and
broadcasters alike to gain a clearer picture of where concerns lie. (Paragraph
76)
43. The current regulatory regime provides for the responsible regulators to act jointly,
focusing action specifically where they have expertise. Ofcom has the formal lead, with
responsibility for the oversight of ICSTIS (which includes approving the ICSTIS code of
practice, budget, annual plan and setting the strategic direction for ICSTIS), while ICSTIS
has the expertise in dealing with the operations of the premium rate telephone industry –
setting and securing the standards and requirements under which premium rate service
providers operate.
●

44. Since the advent of Call TV quiz services, Ofcom and ICSTIS have continued to
work closely to maximize their enforcement efforts and to provide certainty for consumers
and the industry about the operation of the regulatory regime. However, Ofcom and
ICSTIS have stated that there may be a need to inform the public more extensively about
their roles.
45. Both Ofcom and ICSTIS take the view that the current division of responsibilities
works well and, in relation to complaints handling, that it would disadvantage the public to
seek to limit their routes of complaint. Ofcom and ICSTIS have well organised and easily
accessed procedures for the registration of complaints. Complainants to either body may
write, call, e-mail or use web-based facilities. Both bodies’ identities and contact details
are widely publicised including, in ICSTIS’s case, on the back of telephone bills and in
many phone directories. This system of complaints handling is felt to be well tested and
efficient.

8

46. In addition to leading on the response to recent concerns about the operation of Call
TV quiz shows, Ofcom is also considering the regulatory structure for participation TV. A
discussion paper has already been issued and a further consultation will take place in the
near future. Since Call TV quiz programming is the largest and highest profile type of
participation TV, a substantial part of the forthcoming consultation will be given over to it.
47. Furthermore, Ofcom is currently undertaking a broad review of the scope of
regulation of premium rate services. The aim of the review is to consider whether current
premium rate service regulation meets the needs of consumers while supporting an
innovative and growing premium rate service industry. Both regulators are keen to ensure
the most effective regulation of premium rate services in the converging media landscape.
48. Ofcom, ICSTIS and the Gambling Commission all recognise that there is a need for
continued close co-operation as these and other similar services develop in the future whether or not the operation of TV quizzes is caught by the new Gambling Act regime
when it comes into force later this year.
49. Ofcom and ICSTIS will be providing a joint response to the Select Committee
report.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
03/07 364657

9

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail,Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

