Department for Culture Media and Sport
Annual Report 2007
Session 2006/2007
Cm 7104

ISBN 978 0 10 171042 8
CORRECTION
Please note the following corrections:
page 63:DCMS Capital AME for 2005-06 should read £104,000
Total Capital budget AME figure for 2005-06 should read £1,002,014
The Total Capital budget figure for 2005-06 should read £1,146,540

May 2007
LONDON: THE STATIONERY OFFICE

Annual
Report
2007

We aim to improve the
quality of life for all
through cultural and
sporting activities,
to support the pursuit
of excellence and to
champion the tourism,
creative and leisure
industries.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Annual Report 2007

Department for Culture,
Media and Sport –
Departmental Annual Report 2007

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary
of State for Culture, Media and Sport and
the Chief Secretary to the Treasury by
Command of Her Majesty, May 2007.
Cm 7104

£18.00

Contents

Foreword by the Secretary of State

4

Foreword by the Permanent Secretary

6

The year’s highlights

7

Performance and delivery

32

Managing resources

53

Index

74

Enquiries

75

Acknowledgements

76

© Crown Copyright 2007
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms
and departmental logos) may be reproduced free of
charge in any format or medium providing that it is
reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading
context.The material must be acknowledged as Crown
copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this
document should be addressed to:
The Licensing Division
HMSO
St Clements House
2-16 Colegate
Norwich NR3 1BQ
Fax: 01603 723000
Email: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

2

DCMS Annual Report 2007

About DCMS – the
Department for Culture,
Media and Sport
Our aim

Our objectives

DCMS aims to improve the quality of life for all through cultural and
sporting activities, to support the pursuit of excellence and to champion
the tourism, creative and leisure industries.

Our strategic objectives are to:

Our responsibilities
Our responsibilities include the arts, sport, the National Lottery, tourism,
libraries, museums and galleries, broadcasting, press freedom and regulation,
licensing and gambling and the creative industries from film to the
music industry.
We are also responsible for the export licensing of cultural goods, the
management of the Government Art Collection, the Royal Parks Agency
and the historic environment, including the listing of historic buildings and
scheduling of ancient monuments.
As part of our commitment to sport, we are responsible for the 2012
Olympic Games and Paralympic Games.
We also manage humanitarian assistance in the event of a disaster,
such as the London bombings, as well as the organisation of the annual
Remembrance Day Ceremony at the Cenotaph.
In 2006, we took legislation through Parliament to reform the National
Lottery and set up the Big Lottery Fund, which replaced three earlier grantgiving bodies.
We share responsibility for Ofcom (a public corporation) and the Design
Council (an executive NDPB), with the Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI). Our functions are delivered through our three public corporations,
two public broadcasting authorities, one executive agency (the Royal Parks
Agency) and 57 non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs).

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Children and young people
Further enhance access to culture
and sport for children and give them
the opportunity to develop their
talents to the full and enjoy the
benefits of participation.
Communities
Increase and broaden the impact of
culture and sport, to enrich individual
lives, strengthen communities and
improve the places where people live,
now and for future generations.
Economy
Maximise the contribution that the
tourism, creative and leisure industries
can make to the economy.
Delivery
Modernise delivery by ensuring our
sponsored bodies are efficient and
work with others to meet the cultural
and sporting needs of individuals
and communities.
Olympics
Host an inspirational, safe and
inclusive Olympic Games and
Paralympic Games and leave a
sustainable legacy for London
and the UK.

3

Foreword

This year’s Annual Report
has a new format. It uses
the words of people around
the country to illustrate some
of the changes in our society
that DCMS has helped to
bring about. It covers a busy
year with some significant
landmarks.

4

DCMS Annual Report 2007

The BBC gained a Royal Charter and will soon have a new licence fee. Work to
get the country ready to switch to digital TV is on track. And getting London
ready for the 2012 London Games and Paralympic Games has moved ahead
at an impressive rate.
We believe that the 2012 Olympics will be the greatest show on earth. The
budget is now settled; we’re way ahead of where Athens or Sydney were when
they were planning their Olympics, as work has already started on the London
site; we are developing a Cultural Olympiad – a four-year celebration of the
UK’s cultural life; and are taking full advantage of the opportunity to boost the
UK economy by transforming one of the most deprived parts of the country –
the Lower Lea Valley, in East London.
After 2012, London and the UK will never be the same again. The Olympics will
leave an impressive legacy of regeneration. They will create new facilities, a new
city and a new national mood of optimism and excitement about sport, culture,
our environment and design.
Success in the arts continues to thrive – as culture and creativity are at the heart
of our lives in the UK. Record numbers of the public are attending exhibitions and
British artists and performers are winning awards and acclaim all over the world.
This is supported by the Prime Minister,Tony Blair, who heralded a ‘golden age’ in
the arts and creative industries. High expectations, and the knowledge that the
UK can become – and remain – the world hub for culture and creativity are the
rationale behind our continuing case for public investment to keep us there.
Since 1997, the UK’s cultural life and creative industries have been transformed.
Record investment from the Government and soaring private sector support have
reaped a high dividend that has touched the lives of a large proportion of the UK
population. The arts impact in many key areas of Government policy including
education, regeneration, youth engagement and tackling social exclusion.
I want to thank all the staff at DCMS and our colleagues at our partner
organisations.This includes the ministerial team – Richard Caborn, David Lammy
and Shaun Woodward. I would also like to welcome our new Permanent Secretary
Jonathan Stephens, who joins us from the Treasury. He has already settled into his
post admirably and is destined to be a huge asset to the Department.

Rt Hon Tessa Jowell MP
Secretary of State for Culture,
Media and Sport, and Minister
for the Olympics

DCMS Annual Report 2007

5

Foreword

This is the Department’s first Annual Report to Parliament since I was appointed
Permanent Secretary. Most of this year’s achievements were secured under the
leadership of my predecessor, Dame Sue Street, who led the Department so
effectively from 2001 to 2006.
In my first five months in DCMS I have been impressed by the enormous
scope of this relatively small Department. In my first month alone I visited
the Olympic site for the first time, viewed the collections at the V&A and
Tate and stared into the football sized eye of a giant squid at the Natural
History Museum.
Alongside this extraordinary diversity, DCMS has continued to deliver over the
last year.Work on the Olympics has progressed apace, with the development
of the Olympic Park remaining on schedule and £200 million funding allocated
by the Treasury to support our elite athletes in their preparation for the Games.
We delivered a new Charter for the BBC, which will make it stronger and more
independent, and agreed the new Licence Fee settlement.We exceeded our
PSA target of 75 per cent of school children spending a minimum of two hours
a week on sport, and we launched a major review of how we protect our
national heritage with the publication of the Heritage White Paper.
More will be expected of us in the future and I am committed to ensuring that
the Department fulfils its potential. The Department’s first Capability Review
provided a great opportunity to focus on how we do this. I want DCMS to be
clear about the value we add to our sectors and be driven by clear, consistent
priorities.We should capitalise on our size by ensuring that it allows us to act
quickly and be agile in reallocating resources, and we need to develop a more
integrated and strategic approach to working with our sponsored bodies.
The Capability Review Team recognised the great talent, motivation and
potential of our staff. Our successes are down to their commitment and
contribution, working alongside our Ministerial team.

Jonathan Stephens
Permanent Secretary

6

DCMS Annual Report 2007

The year’s
highlights

DCMS Annual Report 2007

7

‘The roadshow was
brilliant. I can’t
wait for 2012!’
Community
engagement
A focal point of the year was the
first anniversary on 6 July 2006 of
London’s winning bid and the launch
of the ‘Be Part of 2012’ roadshow.
Organised in partnership with the
London Organising Committee for
the Olympic Games and Paralympic
Games, the 22-day roadshow travelled
over 5,000 kilometres across the UK,
visiting every English region and
Scotland,Wales and Northern Ireland,
highlighting the benefits the Games
will bring to many communities.

Lizzie
Age 21

DCMS Annual Report 2007

The roadshow started in Trafalgar
Square, where thousands had
cheered London’s success a year
before. It finished with an impressive
firework display in Liverpool on
27 July 2006, six years to the day
of the Opening Ceremony.
Enthusiasm and public support were
confirmed with a UK-wide survey in
December 2006 showing that 79 per
cent of the population support the
Games taking place in London in
2012 – higher than at any point
since winning the bid.

Visitor to the
‘Be Part of 2012’
roadshow, Leeds

9

All milestones met
In April 2006 London hosted the first full visit of the International Olympic
Committee’s Co-ordination Commission. The Co-ordination Commission team
visited a number of Games venues and received detailed reports on progress
across a range of areas, from transport to culture. They warmly praised
London’s progress and our success in delivering all key milestones since
winning the bid to host the 2012 Games.
At the end of the visit, Denis Oswald, Chair of the Co-ordination Commission,
commended London’s “ambitious and visionary project”, recognising the
“energy and excitement that this project is bringing to the city and the country”.
In April, the Olympic Board also agreed its shared vision and objectives for
the Games – to host an inspirational, safe and inclusive Games and to leave
a sustainable legacy for London and the UK. In March 2007 the Secretary of
State announced the final budget for the Olympic Delivery Agency, the body
with responsibility for building venues for 2012 and delivering wider
infrastructure improvements.

Olympic Park on schedule
The first major project began on site in April 2006. This is crucial to the
overall regeneration of the area. Two tunnels are being constructed to take
the 13 kilometres of powerlines that currently cross the Lower Lea Valley on
52 pylons. In April 2007 the first tunnel was completed on schedule and all
tunnelling work is on track to be completed by summer 2007.
By December 2006, 93 per cent of the land needed for the Olympic Park had
been secured and demolition work was underway. A new sports centre will be
built to provide a training area during the Olympic Games. This will also host
tennis and archery during the Paralympic Games and will benefit the local
community after the Games.
The final Olympic Park Masterplan was agreed in June 2006. At the beginning
of February 2007, the planning application for the Olympic Park was submitted.
At 10,000 pages and 15 volumes, it is one of the largest ever applications in
Europe and demonstrates the scale of our vision for the site. Meanwhile, work
continued on the main sporting venues. Iconic designs were agreed for the
Aquatics Centre and procurement began for the centrepiece Olympic Stadium
and the Velopark (the cycling stadium).

Top: The first underground powerlines
tunnel completed on the Olympic Park
site earlier this year.
Above: The agreed design for the London
2012 Aquatics Centre which will host the
swimming, diving and synchronised
swimming events.

Sustainable development remains integral to the development of the Park as
well as the Games overall.Within the Park, this means that we will ensure that
the biodiversity is enhanced, reviving the extensive waterways and restoring the
plant habitats, whilst ensuring that it is accessible to all and that all elements of
local communities are engaged in developing and using the Park and facilities.
The Olympic Delivery Authority’s Sustainable Development Strategy was
approved by the Olympic Board and launched by the Prime Minister in January.
It sets ambitious targets for low carbon emission, low waste and sustainable
transport during the construction of Games venues and infrastructure. The
Commission for a Sustainable London 2012 has been set up by the Olympic
Board to report independently on sustainability for the overall programme.

10

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Paralympic hopes
Wheelchair rugby is Britain’s
fastest growing Paralympic sport,
GB Team ranked fourth in the
2006 world championships.
Wheelchair rugby team The Bulls
were voted the North East’s
favourite Lottery-funded project
and made it to the UK final of
The National Lottery Awards 2006.

Name:
James
Location: UK League play-offs

‘When I became paralysed
I thought life was over,
wheelchair rugby has given
me a new lease of life, and
one I thoroughly enjoy!’

‘My ambition is
to be a pro dancer.
If you like
something – do it!’
Ballet Changed
My Life: Ballet Hoo!
The most high profile of the DCMS
Cultural Pathfinder initiatives was the
‘Leaps and Bounds’ project which set
out to show that the power of the
arts, combined with effective
partnership working, can transform
lives. The project was filmed and in
September 2006 the resulting
documentary, Ballet Changed My Life:
Ballet Hoo! (conceived by Neil Wragg
of Youth at Risk, and Roy Ackerman of
Diverse Productions), was broadcast
on Channel 4.

Jovan
Age 17

DCMS Annual Report 2007

The project took 200 young people in
Birmingham, identified by local youth
workers as ‘at risk’, and provided them
with life coaches, a fitness regime and
introduced them to the basic principles
of ballet. Just under 100 participants
enrolled for the much more intensive
second stage which involved training
at the Birmingham Royal Ballet for six
months. It culminated on 28 September
2006 in a live performance of
Romeo and Juliet at the Birmingham
Hippodrome. The show achieved
ratings of over one million people per
episode. One of the participants
summed up the profound effect of the
experience: “I used to be a nobody –
now I’m a somebody”.

Ballet Hoo! received £100,000
funding from Arts Council England
and £300,000 from local authorities.
The project was designed and
delivered by a partnership including
the Birmingham Royal Ballet,Youth
at Risk, Birmingham City Council, and
Dudley,Wolverhampton and Sandwell
Borough Councils. It was supported by
the Learning and Skills Council and
Black Country Connexions.

Participant of
Ballet Hoo!
Birmingham

13

Heritage Protection White Paper
After extensive consultation across the heritage sector, we published a
White Paper on Heritage Protection Reform in March 2007. This sets out our
proposals for a new heritage protection system that is simpler, more open to
the general public and more flexible. It will enable our historic assets to be
better understood and managed, whilst still continuing to protect them. It offers
an opportunity to address a range of issues, including: the burden of the current
heritage protection consent regimes and the scope for management agreements
to reduce this; and the protection of archaeological sites on agricultural land
and in the marine environment. There are five main strands to the White Paper:
a unified Register of Historic Sites and Buildings of England that will bring
together buildings, archaeology, parks, gardens, battlefields and World
Heritage sites into a single system;
a unified heritage consent regime that brings together Listed Building
Consent and Scheduled Monument Consent;
the use of statutory Heritage Partnership Agreements for owners of large,
more complex sites;
better guidance and support for local authorities, and some new powers
to encourage Local Planning Authorities to give greater priority to heritage
at local level; and
an effective UK-wide marine heritage protection system, which provides
appropriate protection for assets, is simple and clear and delivers
designation decisions quickly.

The Sultan’s Elephant

Top: The Sultan’s Elephant roaming
through Hyde Park in May 2006.

For three days in May 2006, The Sultan’s Elephant entertained Londoners and
the city’s visitors. A majestic 42-tonne, 12m high time-travelling mechanical
elephant and a 5m ‘little’ girl giant roamed the streets in the biggest piece of
free theatre ever seen in London. Over one million people came to see the
event, which was created by the French theatre company Royal de Luxe and
produced by Artichoke Productions. Bringing this breathtaking street theatre to
London was also a logistical triumph requiring the collaboration of a network of
funding and operational partners, including Arts Council England (ACE) and the
Royal Parks. BBC4 brought this unique and enchanting event to an audience
outside London with the documentary, The Elephant and the Sultan.

Above: The Government Art Collection
is a unique British cultural resource
which displays works of art in British
Government buildings both in the
UK and around the world.
The collection includes Samuel Joseph’s
marble bust of William Wilberforce.
This is a study for Joseph’s monumental
statue of Wilberforce in Westminster
Abbey, which was installed in 1840 and
is based on Jean-Antoine Houdon’s
portrait of Voltaire of 1781.

The Sultan’s Elephant is a wonderful example of how the investment DCMS
makes through ACE supports the arts.

Fifth anniversary of free entry to national
museums and galleries
Government investment and changes to the tax laws have meant that wellknown museums like the Natural History Museum and the V&A in London,
the National Railway Museum in York and National Museums Liverpool have
seen admissions soar by 29 million since 2001.
2006 was the best year for admissions to museums nationally since 2001.
This represents an 83 per cent increase in total visits to museums that used
to charge an entrance fee, an extra 6.5 million people. The Renaissance in the
Regions programme of support for regional museums also surpassed its key
participation targets. Over the last two years Hub museums attracted nearly
two million new users, with over 900,000 of them coming from ‘priority’
groups. The number of visits by children aged 5-16 rose by 50 per cent in the
three years to March 2006 – double what museums had been asked to achieve.
14

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Record admissions
Sheffield’s Weston Park Museum
re-opened in October 2006. The
£19 million redevelopment budget
included support from DCMS and
Heritage Lottery Fund. Longlisted
for the Gulbenkian Prize, the
museum attracted 55,000 visitors
in the first 15 days, achieving its
yearly visitors target within three
months of opening.

Name:
Zain
Location: Weston Park Museum,
Sheffield

‘My mum brought me here.
We’ve had a really fun time
and I made her look at
everything!’

‘Helping Mrs Nuttall
with her new digital
box meant so much
to her’
Digital switchover
The only way we can achieve universal
access to free-to-view terrestrial
digital TV via an aerial is by switching
off the analogue network and moving
to digital-only terrestrial television
broadcasting. In response to this, in
September 2005, the Government
confirmed that digital switchover will
occur between 2008 and 2012. This
will take place, ITV region by region,
starting in the Border region. The
Cumbrian town of Whitehaven will
be a flagship project and will switch
in October 2007.

Geoff
Age 63

DCMS Annual Report 2007

The UK is making great progress in its
goal to go digital. More than threequarters of UK households are already
enjoying the wider choice, sound and
picture quality of digital TV.
2006 marked an important step
towards switchover. In Bolton, we and
the BBC managed a trial of the Digital
Switchover Help Scheme, which will
help the vulnerable to make the
switch. Animated robot character
‘Digit Al’ also hit our television screens
as the focal point for raising awareness.
This major communications campaign
is run by Digital UK, the independent,
non-profit organisation leading the
process of digital TV switchover.

RNIB volunteer
for the Digital
Switchover Help
Scheme, Bolton
17

A stronger independent BBC
The end of 2006 saw the expiry of the old BBC Charter and the introduction
of a new Charter on the governance of the BBC over the next ten years.
Following the most comprehensive consultation ever about a BBC Charter, the
new Charter was sealed on 19 September 2006. It saw the replacement of the
BBC Board of Governors with two new bodies: the BBC Trust and the Executive
Board. The BBC Trust will oversee the Executive Board and will be the licence fee
payer’s voice, acting as proxy for the BBC’s shareholders. It is the first public
interest body on this scale in the UK. In April 2007 Sir Michael Lyons was
appointed as the first chairman of the BBC Trust. The Trust will also have
responsibility to ensure that the BBC’s activities are not anti-competitive
and are consistent with a vibrant and dynamic broadcasting market.
In creating the new Charter we have also defined the BBC’s role and scope
more clearly than before through a new set of six public purposes: sustaining
citizenship and civil society; promoting education and learning; stimulating
creativity and cultural excellence; reflecting the UK’s nations, regions and
communities; bringing the world to the UK and the UK to the world; and building
a digital Britain.The new arrangements took full effect on 1 January 2007.

Above: The BBC Trust works on behalf of
licence fee payers: it ensures the BBC
provides high quality output and good
value for all UK citizens and it protects
the independence of the BBC.

A new six-year licence fee settlement was announced on 18 January 2007.
The settlement provides for annual nominal increases in the licence fee of
3 per cent for the first two years, and 2 per cent in years three, four and five.
This means the price of a colour TV licence will rise from its current level of
£131.50 to a figure of up to £151.50 in 2012. The settlement followed the
most open process for setting the level of the licence fee ever, which took into
account the views of the public and the industry, as well as independent advice
and research.

18

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Get set for digital
From digital switchover to
broadband and the People’s
Network, libraries have helped
people learn about new technology
and develop digital skills.
Since opening in March 2005 the
Jubilee Library in Brighton has
run sessions to actively support
digital inclusion.

Name:
Eileen
Location: Jubilee Library,
Brighton

‘I’ve learned so much about
what you can do with all
this digital technology.’

‘Getting the funding
has made everything
so much easier’
UK Sport Olympic
and Paralympic
athlete funding
package

including coaches, sport scientists,
and state of the art facilities. To win
medals, we need the best high
performance sport system in the
world, for 2012 and beyond.

Hosting an excellent Olympic and
Paralympic Games in 2012 is not
simply about building superb stadiums
and athlete facilities. It is also about
sending the largest, most talented
Team GB to compete and win more
medals than we have achieved in
recent history.

In March 2006, the Chancellor
announced an additional £200 million
Exchequer funding for Olympic and
Paralympic athletes in advance of
London 2012. He also called on the
private sector to contribute £100
million to high performance sport.
In summer 2006, UK Sport announced
an additional £65 million for Olympic
and Paralympic sport in the run up to
the Beijing Games in 2008, taking the

Successful athletes need raw talent,
dedication and commitment, with the
best support teams around them,

Eniola
Age 20

DCMS Annual Report 2007

total investment to £215 million.
Subject to a complete review of
performance of all sports after Beijing,
UK Sport has available £400 million to
invest in high performance sport
between the Beijing and London
Games.
In addition UK Sport is investing
£17 million from 2004-08 through the
Talented Athlete Scholarship Scheme
(TASS) and TASS 2012 to assist in the
identification and nurturing of rising
talent. 2,800 individual athletes have
been supported through TASS in the
first three years.

Talented Athlete
Scholarship
Scheme recipient,
London
21

School sport
The National School Sport Strategy – being implemented jointly by the
Department for Education and Skills (DfES) and DCMS – went live on 1 April
2003. DfES and DCMS share an ambitious PSA target to increase the percentage
of 5-16 year olds spending at least two hours each week on high quality
physical education (PE) and school sport, to 75 per cent by 2006 and 85 per
cent by 2008. By 2010, the ambition is to offer all children at least four hours
of sport a week. Over £1.5 billion (including Lottery funding) is being invested
in PE and school sport from 2003 to 2008.
The 2005-06 PE, School Sport and Club Links survey found that:
80 per cent of pupils in partnership schools participate in at least two hours
of high quality PE and school sport in a typical week, exceeding the 2006
target by five percentage points. This represents an increase of almost
16 per cent on 2004-05 and 29 per cent on 2003-04;
in partnership schools during the 2005-06 academic year, 71 per cent of
pupils were involved in intra-school competitive activities;
across Years 2-11, 27 per cent of pupils in partnership schools participated in
at least one sports club linked to their school (this includes dance and multiskill clubs). This represents a 22 per cent rise on 2004-05 and 42 per cent
on 2003-04. The most common sports for which there were club links were
football (78 per cent), cricket (52 per cent), rugby union (46 per cent), dance
(40 per cent) and athletics (38 per cent);
across Years 10-13, 13 per cent of pupils in partnership schools have been
actively involved in sports volunteering and leadership during the academic
year. This represents an 18 per cent rise on 2004-05 and a 44 per cent rise
on 2003-04.

The sporting landscape
The organisation of sport underwent a major reform on 1 April 2006, as had
been announced by the Secretary of State in September 2005. This sought
to streamline and clarify the respective roles and responsibilities of Sport
England and UK Sport.

Top: Young leaders at the Step into Sport
Camp, at Loughborough University.
Above: The Active People survey results,
published in December 2006, show that
21 per cent of people (aged 16 plus) are
taking part in 30 minutes of sport three
times a week.

Sport England’s focus was tightened to give them lead responsibility for
increasing participation in sport at a community level, with responsibility
for the English Institute of Sport, the successful Talented Athlete Scholarship
Scheme (TASS), and the English elements of the UK ‘performance pathway’ –
taking the athlete from talent identification through to the podium – being
transferred to UK Sport.
The Secretary of State said: “Winning the Olympic Games was a huge
achievement for sport in this country. It is vital that we capitalise on this
once-in-a-generation opportunity to boost our medal hopes and drive up
participation in sport. The changes will create a clear organisational
distinction between community and elite sport.”
An element of Lottery and Exchequer funding was transferred from
Sport England to UK Sport in respect of these changes.

22

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Breathing spaces
Millions of Londoners and tourists
visit the eight Royal Parks for free
each year. The 5,000 acres of
historic parkland provide
unparalleled opportunities for
enjoyment, exploration and
healthy living in the heart of the
capital. The Hub in The Regent’s
Park offers a host of facilities for
community and sporting activities.

Name:
Kalli
Location: The Hub, The Regent’s
Park, London

‘I run round here all the
time. It’s great to have such
a lovely green space right in
the centre of London.’

‘The difference in all
the bars round here
is amazing. They’re
busier, but safer’
Licensing laws
On 24 November 2006, we celebrated
the first anniversary of the new
licensing laws.While firm conclusions
about the impact of the new regime
will not be drawn until the autumn of
2007, there is a broad consensus that
there has not been the surge in crime
and disorder predicted by some.

Iain
Age 43

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Emerging evidence already suggests
the new licensing laws are helping
local authorities and the police to
manage the night-time economy
better. For example, in the Broad
Street area of Birmingham, strong
partnership working and effective
licence conditions have delivered real
results. Broad Street now has a greater
diversity of premises attracting
customers in a wider age range and
reported violent crime is down by
over 50 per cent.

Consumer surveys in Birmingham
indicate that:
66 per cent of visitors regularly visit
pubs, bars and clubs, up from 63 per
cent in 2005; and
49 per cent feel getting home is
quicker and easier due to the
provision of taxi marshals and
extended licensing hours.

Bar manager in
Broad Street,
Birmingham

25

Tourism Industry
Emergency Response group
Intensive DCMS and VisitBritain-led work through the Tourism Industry
Emergency Response group (TIER) helped the London and UK tourism industries
to achieve full recovery from the effects of the terrible bomb attacks of July 2005.
In 2006, 32.2 million visitors spent a record £15.4 billion in the UK. TIER has
established a robust and flexible response mechanism for dealing with tourism
emergencies, which has already demonstrated its effectiveness during the bird
flu scares of mid-2006 and early 2007. The strong industry performance which
TIER helped maintain during 2006 provides a firm base for the economy to
make the most of the historic visitor opportunity of the 2012 Olympic Games
and Paralympic Games.

Gambling Act
Significant progress has been made towards implementing the Gambling Act
2005. In December 2006 this culminated in the publication of statutory
instruments that enable the Gambling Commission to start accepting
applications for new operating and personal licences. These will come into
effect from 1 September 2007. Any business that wants to provide facilities
for gambling in Britain will be licensed by the Commission.We consulted
extensively with industry to ensure that secondary legislation reflects business
needs. This took into account views on a range of issues, including the fees
structure and a special exemption for small-scale operators, freeing them
from the burden of having to acquire a personal licence.

Above: Capturing the imagination
of the travelling public, England Rocks!
encouraged international and UK
tourists to enjoy English locations
and destinations associated with the
country’s rock and pop music heritage.

DCMS also designed the transitional arrangements to minimise burdens on business
– offering an appropriate notice period before applications are due; introducing
a fast-track procedure for most existing businesses; letting existing licences for
low-risk industry sectors roll over until expiry; and providing safety valve business
continuation rights for applications not determined by 1 September 2007.

26

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Cultural tourism
Oxford Castle is a unique,
award-winning visitor experience.
Features include the renovated
castle and prison, a new learning
centre and several cafés
and restaurants.

Names:

Haeree, Sang-hee
and Junghyun
Location: Oxford Castle,
Oxford

‘This is a great place to
chill and hang out. Kind
of escaping the city right
in its centre.’

‘I love playing music
with my friends.
It’s much more fun’
Live music
The music industry is a significant
contributor to the UK’s economy,
producing £6 billion annually and
employing about 130,000 people.
In 2006, a combination of both new
and established artists helped UK
acts claim their largest share of album
best-sellers since 1997. 66.9 million
singles were sold in 2006 – the
highest number since 1999 – of which
79 per cent were digital downloads.
2.2 million digital albums were sold
between April and December 2006.
The live music scene makes a vital
contribution to that success.

Louie
Age 6

DCMS Annual Report 2007

The Live Music Forum, chaired by
Feargal Sharkey, has continued to
monitor the impact of the 2003
Licensing Act on the provision of live
music and has considered ways in
which live music, and its cultural and
economic importance, can be further
promoted. In 2006, the Forum and the
Department jointly commissioned
research into the experience of smaller
venues in applying for authorisation
under the 2003 Act to stage live
music. The results of this research
will help to inform the Forum when it
produces its final recommendations to
the Government in a few months’ time.

Britten Sinfonia
family music day,
Norwich

29

Creative Economy Programme
The Creative Economy Programme – a joint initiative between DCMS and
the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) – is the first comprehensive UK
Government assessment of the state of our creative economy.
Within the programme, we are bringing together ideas from a broad range
of stakeholders. These include seven working groups established at the outset
of the programme, which examine the drivers of productivity in the creative
economy, along with consultation responses and a schedule of industry
consultation events.
Following further widespread industry consultation, we plan to produce
a Green Paper in summer 2007. This will set out what makes the creative
economy so important to the UK, how the creative sectors are changing, the
drivers behind that change, and the potential obstacles to productivity in the
sectors. It will have implications for Government policy and help identify
how we best support the continued success of the creative economy in areas
including education and skills, business support, technological development,
and supporting the UK’s cultural and economic infrastructure.

Tax relief for film
In November 2006, the European Commission approved a revised cultural
test for British Film, in line with the European Union’s State Aid requirements.
As the first gateway to the new tax film reliefs announced by the Chancellor
in the 2006 Budget, this is designed to encourage the production of culturally
British films. Under the new relief, British films which pass the cultural test,
spend more than 25 per cent of their expenditure in the UK, and are destined
for theatrical release, will be eligible to claim relief worth up to 16 per cent of
their budget for larger films and 20 per cent for smaller films. HM Treasury
estimates the new tax relief will be worth as much as £120 million per year
to the film industry.

Top: Bridge by Michael Cross, part of the
London Design Festival 2006.
Above: Ken Russell in conversation at
the 2006 Encounters Short Film Festival
in Bristol. Over 100 UK short films were
shown at the festival.

The test has been widely welcomed by those working in the film sector.
It consists of four key sections, each of which measures the extent of a film’s
British cultural character. Films will be awarded points in each of the
categories, needing to score a minimum of 16 points out of a possible 31
to pass the test.
DCMS has also continued to make progress on negotiations on a new package
of film co-production agreements, bringing economic and cultural benefits for
the UK and partner countries. A treaty with South Africa, signed by the Secretary
of State and the South African Arts Minister in May 2006, will come into force
once the constitutional procedures have been completed. Negotiations are
also progressing with India, China, Jamaica and Morocco. Such agreements
enable films made jointly by UK producers and their counterparts in other
countries to qualify as films with ‘national’ status in both the UK and the
other country, meaning that they are eligible for any national incentives.

30

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Soulful singing
LSO St Luke’s Community Choir is
part of LSO Discovery, the London
Symphony Orchestra’s music
education and community
programme.With supporters
including Arts Council England and
Big Lottery Fund, the programme
brings over 30,000 people annually
into contact with the Orchestra,
its music and musicians.

Names: Fotini and Nevo
Location: LSO St Luke’s,
London

‘Singing is like air for me,
it keeps me alive! I love
working together each week.
After our last concert, I was
incandescent with joy –
what an exhilarating
experience!’

Performance
and delivery
Public Service
Agreements
Public Service Agreements (PSAs) set
out each Department’s aim, objectives
and key outcome-based targets. They
are agreed with HM Treasury and form
an integral part of the spending plans
outlined in Spending Reviews (SRs).

32

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2002 PSA Target Summary

PSA 1
Enhance the take-up of sporting
opportunities by 5-16 year olds
by increasing the percentage of
school children who spend a
minimum of two hours each
week on high quality PE and
school sport within and beyond
the curriculum from 25% in
2002 to 75% by 2006.
Performance summary
Met.
Indicator
Percentage of 5-16 year olds in schools
who spend a minimum of two hours
each week during term time on high
quality PE and sport within and
beyond the National Curriculum.
Proportion of lessons in which the
quality of teaching is assessed by
Ofsted as good or better.
Joint target with the Department for
Education and Skills

PSA 2
Increase significantly take-up
of cultural and sporting
opportunities by new users
aged 20 and above from
priority groups.
Performance summary
Partly met.
Indicator
Take-up of arts opportunities
by disabled people, black and
ethnic minorities.

Adult visitors from socio-economic
C2, D and E groups to DCMS
sponsored museums and galleries.
Performance summary: Met.
Visits to regional museums by
new users.
Performance summary: Met.
Sport Coaching.
Performance summary: Partly met.
Visits by new users from minority
and socially deprived groups to the
historic environment.
Performance summary: Met.

PSA 3
Improve the productivity of
the tourism, creative and
leisure industries.
Performance summary
Met.*

PSA 4
Improve significantly the value
for money of the Department’s
sponsored bodies, measured by
a matrix of NDPB indicators.
Performance summary
Met.
Indicator
A range of performance indicators for
two groups of sponsored bodies – the
national museums and galleries and
the Lottery distributors – will be
collected and supplemented with
text to explain any factors beyond
an organisation’s control that may
explain variances. The outturn figures
and text will be used to assess overall
effectiveness and efficiency in
delivering objectives.
Note that formal reporting against
this set of indicators has been
overtaken by the efficiency
programme, reported on page 51.

Indicator
Productivity is estimated for each of
the three industries by dividing gross
value added by total employment.
Gross value added and total
employment are estimated from the
Office of National Statistics Annual
Business Inquiry. Baselines and targets
are reported under two headings:
‘Tourism and leisure-related
industries’ and ‘Creative industries’.
Targets take the form of annual
percentage increases in the
productivity figures higher than those
for the service sector as a whole.
* Provisional data

Performance summary: Not met.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

33

SR2002 Performance Report PSA 1

PSA 1 Target
Enhance the take-up of sporting
opportunities by 5-16 year olds
by increasing the percentage
of school children who spend
a minimum of two hours each
week on high quality PE and
school sport within and beyond
the curriculum from 25% in
2002 to 75% by 2006. (The
2002 baseline was an estimate
of PE and school sports
participation. The 2003-04 PE,
School Sport and Club Links
survey results are therefore used
as the baseline.)

Project description
This is a programme of nine linked
projects, collectively delivering the PE,
School Sport and Club Links (PESSCL)
Strategy. It is being delivered through
an extensive network of delivery
agents and partnerships. Those
programmes are:
Specialist sports colleges
School Sport Partnerships
Gifted and Talented
QCA PE and School Sport
Investigation
Step into Sport
Professional development
Club links
Swimming

PE and school sport

Sporting playgrounds

Indicator
Percentage of 5-16 year olds in schools
who spend a minimum of two hours
each week during term time on high
quality PE and sport within and
beyond the National Curriculum.
(Source: PE, School Sport and Club
Links (PESSCL) Survey.)

Linked work on coaching will also
support delivery and forms part of the
PSA 2 programme.

Baseline: 62% of pupils in school sport
partnerships participated in at least
two hours of PE and school sport
during 2003-04. (At the time of the
survey 30% of schools in England
were in a partnership.)

Ongoing work in this area is
described under PSA 1 in SR2004.

Ofsted evidence is also used to
measure this PSA.

Progress
Met.
The 2006 target has been exceeded
by five percentage points.

Latest outturn data
The 2005-06 school sport survey
showed that 80% of pupils within a
School Sport Partnership took part in
at least two hours of high quality PE
and school sport in a typical week,
compared with 69% in 2004-05.
Participation in PE and sport in all
three types of schools has also exceed
the milestone: 82% of pupils in
primary and special schools are doing
at least two hours of high quality
PE and Sport compared to 64% in
2004-05. The secondary schools figure
is 78% compared with 75% in 2004-05.
There has also been a year-on-year
improvement in all of the other
key outcomes:
37% of pupils in partnership schools
now take part in inter-school
competitive sport, compared with
25% in 2003-04;
27% of pupils in partnership schools
participate in club sport, a rise of
42% on 2003-04; and
13% of Year 10-13 pupils in
partnerships schools are actively
involved in sports leadership and
volunteering.
From September 2006, all maintained
schools in England have been within a
school sport partnership and there are
over 400 specialist sports colleges.
Ofsted judged that in 2003-04, the
quality of teaching was good or better
in 80% of secondary schools and 60%
of primary schools.
Source of data: The 2005-06 PE, School Sport and Clubs Link
(PESSCL) Survey and Ofsted reports

34

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2002 Performance Report PSA 2

PSA 2 Target
Increase significantly take-up
of cultural and sporting
opportunities by new users
aged 20 and above from
priority groups.
This target is measured by a basket
of five indicators covering culture
and sports, as described below.
The technical note stated that the
minimum requirement to demonstrate
progress toward the PSA target would
be to meet four out of the six targets
set. To date, we have met three targets
on museums and heritage participation,
and are on course for a fourth on
sports participation (final results to be
reported in the Department’s Annual
Report 2007).We did not meet the
two targets on arts participation. The
overall target is therefore partly met.

ACE has put a remedial action plan in
place for the SR2004 PSA which builds
on a number of key lessons learnt from
delivery of this PSA.These include:

the same periods.This enabled the two
data collection systems to be calibrated.
A full report on the methodology for
this is available on the DCMS website.

a single system which will improve
the way ACE captures PSA data;

a restructured national office with
the capacity and expertise to deliver
on the PSA plan; and

Comparing the engagement rate for the
total population produced a calibration
factor of 1.0 for the participation target
and 1.1 for the attendance target.
Applying these to the 2005/2006
Taking Part data showed that, for the
resulting adjusted estimates, there has
been no statistically significant change
for any priority group for either
attendance or participation.

contributions to the Taking Part survey
which allows greater consistency,
accuracy and frequency of PSA data.

National museums
and galleries

development of a toolkit to support
RFOs in measuring their impact;
establishment of a PSA 3 board
within ACE;

The Arts

DCMS has established a strengthened
PSA 3 Arts Advisory Board comprising
key contacts from the voluntary,
public and private sector who could
influence the target and part of the
wider delivery network. ACE is playing
a major contributory role in this.

Indicator
Increase attendance and participation
by under-represented groups in
arts events.

Latest outturn data
Analysis indicates that there has been no
change in attendance or participation in
the arts for any priority group.

Targets: Increase attendance by 3%
and participation by 2%.

There has been no statistically
significant change for any priority group
for either attendance or participation in
the arts.The comparison is indicative as
it is based on estimates adjusted to
account for differing base and outturn
data sources.The baselines for this
target were set using the Omnibus
Survey run by the Office for National
Statistics. The 2001 survey provided
baselines for the disabled and socially
excluded elements of the target and
the 2002 survey provided the baseline
for the BME component. The target is
being evaluated using data from the
new DCMS Taking Part survey. In order
to ensure consistency questions were
asked simultaneously on both the
Omnibus and Taking Part survey over

Project description
The package of interventions
underpinning this objective was
delivered by Arts Council England
(ACE), managed and monitored
through the Funding Agreement with
DCMS. ACE worked through three
main funding channels: regularly
funded organisations (RFOs), grants
for the arts (open application funds)
and flexible funds (which are not open
to application).
Progress
Not met.
DCMS Annual Report 2007

Indicator
Increase by 8% by 2005-06 adult
visitors in socio-economic groups C2,
D and E to DCMS-sponsored national
museums and galleries.
Project description
The maintenance of free access is key
to further growth in admissions from
these groups. The Funding Agreements
for 2003-06 set specific targets for the
groups concerned and each museum
undertook specific targeted activities
depending on its own circumstances.
The outcomes of all of these projects
were measured and evaluated.
Progress
Met.
Outturn data
Performance data collected from
DCMS-sponsored museums and
galleries.
C2DE visitors to national museums
and galleries:
2002/03 Baseline

5,362,167

Target

5,791,140 (8%)

Latest outturn

6,820,939(27%)

35

Regional museums
Indicator
Attract 500,000 visits to regional
museums by new users.
Project description
£60m was available over the Spending
Review period for building the capacity
of groups of Hub museums in the nine
regions, so that they could extend
their reach to under-represented
groups and step up their educational
activities.The funds were administered
by the Museums, Libraries and Archives
Council under a framework agreed
with DCMS. Development was in two
phases, with the three Phase 1 Hubs
receiving 70% of the SR2002 funds.
Progress
Met.
Latest outturn data
Performance data are provided
by the Museums, Libraries and
Archives Council.
This project started from a zero base.
2004-06
Total new users for the first two years
of the target has been 3,086,283,
of which 1,263,403 were from
priority groups.

Sport
Indicator
Sport Coaching:
National Coaching Certificate in
20 sports by 2006.
45 Coach Development Officers
by 2005.

Project description
This project aimed to create a step
change in the recruitment, education,
employment and deployment of
coaches working in England and
elsewhere in the UK. It sought to
transform coach education,
professionalise and diversify the
coaching workforce and open up
access to enable many more people
to benefit from coaching.
Progress
Partly met.
5-level UK Coaching Certificate
(UKCC) framework established.
13 sports endorsed to deliver
UKCC qualifications.
Estimated that 18 sports will
be endorsed to deliver UKCC
qualifications by April 2007 and
21 by June.
Network of 45 Coach Development
Officers established by 2005.
Created 3,000 Community Sports
Coach (CSC) posts by end of 2006.
Latest outturn data
Performance data were provided by
Sports Coach UK:
February 2007 – 33 Coach
Development Officer (CDO) posts
out of a total of 45 posts are currently
filled. Appointments for vacant posts
have been frozen while the CDO role
is reviewed.

Historic environment
Indicator
Attract 100,000 visits by new users
from minority and socially deprived
groups to the historic environment.
Project description
This project aimed to produce a step
change in the way the sector managed
engagement with the historic
environment, including a more
inclusive approach to site interpretation
and the development of offers, which
appealed to different sections of
the community.
The target formed part of the English
Heritage Funding Agreement. Delivery
of the entire target was formally
delegated to English Heritage.
Priority groups for this target were
defined as Black and Minority Ethnic
(BME) and social groups C2, D and E
who had not visited an historic
attraction in the last 12 months,
as measured by self-declaration.
Progress
Met.
Latest outturn data
Performance data are provided by
English Heritage.
The project started from a zero base.
2004-05 Outturn

323,478

February 2007 – Funding awards made
to support 3,248 CSC posts and 2,822
CSC posts currently filled.

3,000 Community Sports Coach
posts by 2006.

36

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2002 Performance Report PSA 3

PSA 3 Target
Improve the productivity
of the tourism, creative and
leisure industries.
The DCMS seeks to support this
objective at a microeconomic level,
with projects designed to impact on
its sponsored industries. These take
two forms: research aimed at
understanding drivers of performance
in the industries; and policies informed
by the research and other evidence.
The impact of these projects will
be measured and assessed through
analysis of the contribution the
tourism, creative and leisure industries
make to UK productivity. This will be a
long-term project. The base year for
the data on productivity performance
is 2002, and the trends in productivity
up to and including 2005 are shown in
the graph below.

The performance of each of the
projects supporting the target was
reported in the DCMS Autumn
Performance Report 2005. Projects
included overhauling legislation
(the Communications Act 2003, the
Licensing Act 2003 and the Gambling
Act 2005); production of the Digital
Television Action Plan; and tourism
marketing activities. In each case, the
aims for the project had been met in
2005. This information is therefore not
repeated here.

Latest outturn data
Overview
The graph below shows the change
in productivity for creative industries,
tourism and other leisure industries
against the whole economy and
service sector. The figures are shown
as an index with a base year of 2002.

The final results for this PSA will not
be known until the data for 2005
becomes available in June/July 2007.
The graph below and the table
overleaf show that the target has been
met for both creative industries and
tourism and other leisure industries,
however this result is based on
provisional 2005 figures and is subject
to change.

Indices of real changes in productivity
125

Provisional 2005

120
115
Tourism related
and other leisure

110

Creative industries

105

Whole economy
100

Service sector

95
90
85
80
1998

1999

2000

DCMS Annual Report 2007

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

37

Provisional 2005 data show that
productivity in both the creative
industries and tourism and other
leisure industries grew faster than for
the service sector as a whole – in line
with achieving the target.
However, this suggested rise is being
investigated by the Office for National
Statistics (ONS) and the data may be
revised when the 2005 estimates are
finalised in June/July 2007.

Data are collated from ONS’s Annual
Business Inquiry (ABI). For more
information please see:
www.statistics.gov.uk/abi/default.asp
ONS data are produced in accordance
with National Statistics Code
of Practice.
The data have some limitations when
used to examine the reported changes
in productivity:

Productivity is measured as gross
value added (GVA) divided by total
employment (please see the Technical
Note for more detail on definitions and
methodology).The provisional 2005
data will be finalised in June/July 2007
so all data for that year should at this
stage be acknowledged as provisional
and could be subject to change.

at low levels of disaggregation,
the estimates from the ABI may
fluctuate as a result of the sampling
process and the complex way that
Value Added is estimated;
firms are classified by their main
activity. The value added from any
secondary activity will be allocated
to their main category. This could
lead to under- or over-estimates in
some cases;

to make meaningful comparisons
across time it is necessary to ensure
prices are constant. GVA figures are
all expressed in 2002 prices, and an
average annual gross domestic
product deflator is used;
GVA and employment from
Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) codes are split to make the
DCMS estimates of productivity.
Constant proportions are used for
tourism sectors such as bars,
restaurants etc and creative industries;
the Inter-Departmental Business
Register (IDBR), used for Office for
National Statistics business surveys,
covers businesses that are registered
for VAT. It will not include small
businesses whose turnover is below
the VAT threshold and who are not
registered for VAT. The register will
include businesses running a PAYE
scheme. This means that coverage
of businesses in some sectors of the
creative industries will be limited.

Annual and average percentage productivity changes from 1998 onwards
Average
2005 1998-2005

Sector

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Creative industries
(excl design and craft)

3.3%

3.5%

-3.1%

-0.9%

1.5%

0.9% 12.4%

2.8%

Tourism-related and
other leisure

3.0%

4.1%

3.2%

3.3%

-0.1%

1.6%

4.7%

3.3%

All services

1.2%

2.7%

1.7%

0.9%

1.2%

2.3%

1.6%

1.9%

Whole economy

1.6%

2.9%

1.5%

1.0%

1.8%

2.5%

1.1%

2.1%

Back series subject to change due to updates of the GDP Deflator.

38

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2002 Performance Report PSA 4

PSA 4 Target
Improve significantly the value
for money of the Department’s
sponsored bodies, measured by
a matrix of NDPB indicators.
Progress
Met.
Under this PSA, a programme of work
was devised to improve the value
delivered through our sponsored
bodies by:
implementing targeted reform
programmes for specific NDPBs
where a major and pressing need
has been identified;
better aligning NDPB activity with
DCMS priorities, through hold-back
and ring fencing of funds and new
tighter funding agreements;
reforming the delivery of Lottery
funds to ensure fairer and more
cost-effective distribution to all
areas and communities throughout
the UK;

Seven related, though distinct,
projects were set out in the DCMS
2004 Autumn Performance Report
(APR). The 2005 APR reported that the
reforms of the British Library, British
Museum, Sport England, tourism
bodies, and English Heritage had
all been met early. The NDPB
modernisation strategy had been
subsumed into the Efficiency
Programme set up as part of SR2004
(which is reported on below). The one
project that had not been completed
by the time of the 2005 APR was
lottery reform. This has since been
completed with the National Lottery
Act 2006 receiving royal assent in
July 2006.
Latest outturn data
As noted above, all projects
undertaken in support of improving
value for money in DCMS-sponsored
bodies (as identified in 2004 APR) have
been completed. Formal reporting
against this set of indicators has been
overtaken by the efficiency programme.

improving our appointments
function and the way in which
we work with the Boards of our
NDPBs; and
identifying generic constraints
on NDPB performance with
which the Department can help,
including those relating to pay and
the workforce.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

39

SR2004 PSA Target Summary

PSA 1

PSA 3

PSA 4

Enhance the take-up of sporting
opportunities by 5-16 year olds
so that the percentage of school
children who spend a minimum
of two hours each week on high
quality PE and school sport within
and beyond the curriculum from
25% in 2002 to 75% by 2006 and
to 85% by 2008, and to at least
75% in each School Sport
Partnership by 2008.

By 2008, increase the take-up
of cultural and sporting
opportunities by adults and
young people aged 16 and
above from priority groups.

By 2008 improve the
productivity of the tourism,
creative and leisure industries.

Performance summary
Not yet assessed.

Indicator
Productivity is estimated for each of
the three industries by dividing gross
value added by total employment.
Gross value added and total
employment are estimated from the
Office of National Statistics Annual
Business Inquiry (ABI). Baselines and
targets are reported under two
headings: ‘Tourism and leisure-related
industries’ and ‘Creative industries’.
Targets take the form of annual
percentage increases in the productivity
figures higher than those for the
service sector as a whole.

Performance summary
Ahead.
Indicator
Percentage of 5-16 year olds in schools
who spend a minimum of two hours
each week during term time on high
quality PE and sport within and
beyond the National Curriculum.
Joint target with Department for
Education and Skills

PSA 2
Halt the year on year increase
in obesity among children under
11 by 2010, in the context of a
broader strategy to tackle obesity
in the population as a whole.
Performance summary
On course.
Joint target with Department for
Education and Skills and Department
of Health

40

Indicator
Increasing the number who
participate in active sports at
least 12 times a year by 3%, and
increasing the number who engage
in at least 30 minutes of moderate
intensity level sport at least three
times a week by 3%.
Performance summary:
Not yet assessed.
Increasing the number who
participate in arts activity at least
twice a year by 2% and increasing
the number who attend arts events
at least twice a year by 3%.

Performance summary
On course.*

* Provisional data

Performance summary:
Not yet assessed.
Increasing the number accessing
museums and galleries collections
by 2%.
Performance summary:
Not yet assessed.
Increasing the number visiting
designated historic environment
sites by 3%.
Performance summary:
Not yet assessed.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2004 Performance Report PSA 1

PSA 1 Target
Enhance the take-up of sporting
opportunities by 5-16 year olds
by increasing the percentage of
school children in England who
spend a minimum of two hours
each week on high quality PE
and school sport within and
beyond the curriculum from
25% in 2002 to 75% by 2006
and to 85% by 2008, and to at
least 75% in each School Sport
Partnership by 2008. (The 2002
baseline was an estimate of PE
and school sports participation.
The 2003-04 PE, School Sport
and Club Links survey results are
therefore used as the baseline.)

PE and school sport
Indicator
Percentage of 5-16 year olds in schools
who spend a minimum of two hours
each week during term time on high
quality PE and sport within and
beyond the National Curriculum.
(Source: Annual Audit of School
Sport Partnerships.)
Baseline: 62% of pupils in School
Sport Partnerships participated in at
least two hours of PE and school sport
during 2003-04. (At the time of the
survey 30% of schools in England
were in a partnership.)
Ofsted evidence is also used to
measure this PSA.

Project description
This is a programme of nine linked
projects, collectively delivering the PE,
School Sport and Club Links (PESSCL)
Strategy. It is being delivered through
an extensive network of delivery
agents and partnerships. Those
programmes are:
Specialist sports colleges
School Sports Partnerships
Gifted and Talented
QCA PE and School Sport
Investigation
Step into Sport
Professional development
Club links
Swimming
Sporting playgrounds
Progress
Ahead.
80% of pupils in School Sport
Partnerships participated in at least
two hours of PE and school sport
during 2005-06. (At the time of the
survey 80% of schools in England
were in a partnership.)
Since September 2006, all schools
in England are within a School
Sport Partnership.
Take-up of professional development
now exceeds monthly targets with
over 100,000 teacher places taken
up and driving high quality.
The 2005-06 survey shows increased
participation by girls and pupils with
special needs.
Participation by KS4 pupils, ethnic
minorities and pupils from deprived
backgrounds remains a challenge,
as do regional variations.

Latest outturn data
The 2005-06 school sport survey
showed that 80% of pupils within a
School Sport Partnership took part
in at least two hours of high quality
PE and school sport in a typical week,
compared with 69% in 2004-05.
Participation in PE and sport in all
three types of schools has also
exceeded the milestone (82% of
pupils in primary and special schools
are doing at least two hours of high
quality PE and Sport compared to
64% in 2004-05. The secondary
schools figure is 78% compared with
75% in 2004-05).
There has also been a year-on-year
improvement in all of the other
key outcomes:
37% of pupils in partnership schools
now take part in inter-school
competitive sport, as compared
with 25% in 2003-04;
27% of pupils in partnership schools
participate in club sport, a rise of
42% on 2003-04; and
13% of Year 10-13 pupils in
partnerships schools are actively
involved in sports leadership and
volunteering.
From September 2006, all maintained
schools in England have been within a
School Sport Partnership and there are
over 400 specialist sports colleges.
The target of 75% of pupils in School
Sport Partnerships doing two hours
high quality PE and school sport was
a ‘floor’ target. Now that all schools
are within a School Sport Partnership,
next year’s survey will allow
assessment of whether all partnership
schools are above the 75% minimum
target and look at the average across
the partnerships.
Source of data: The 2005-06 school sport survey and
Ofsted reports

DCMS Annual Report 2007

41

SR2004 Performance Report PSA 2

PSA 2 Target
Halt the year-on-year increase
in obesity among children under
11 by 2010, in the context of
a broader strategy to tackle
obesity in the population as
a whole.

Childhood obesity
Indicator
Prevalence of obesity as defined by
National BMI percentile classification
for children aged 2-10 years (inclusive)
measured through the Health Survey
for England.
Halting the increase would mean no
statistically significant change in
prevalence between the two threeyear periods, 2005/06/07 and
2008/09/10.
Project description
A comprehensive cross-Government
programme of work to help families
lead healthier and more active lives.

42

Progress
On course.
As a Department we have made good
progress in helping families lead
healthier and more active lives:
in school sport (in partnership with
the Department for Education and
Skills), 80% of school children now
do at least two hours of school sport
a week, beating our target of 75%
for 2006;
we have published Time for Play:
encouraging greater play
opportunities for children and
young people;
Ofcom recently published their new
rules on restricting the broadcast
advertising of foods high in fat, salt
and sugar to children.
Latest outturn data
Progress against the target is measured
by the Health Survey for England
(HSE) of obesity prevalence in children
aged 2-10. Annual performance
measured by comparing HSE figures
for aggregate three-year periods
(i.e. 2002-04 against 2003-05, against
2004-06 and so on until 2008-10.)
Three-year aggregates are used to
account for the limited sample size.
The prevalence of obesity in 2-10
year old English children for the threeyear period 2002-04 was 14.9%.
The equivalent figure for 2003-05
was also 14.9%.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2004 Performance Report PSA 3

PSA 3 Target
By 2008, increase the take-up
of cultural and sporting
opportunities by adults and
young people aged 16 and
above from priority groups.

Participation
in sport
Indicator
Increasing the number of people
from priority groups who participate
in active sports at least 12 times a
year by 3%, and increasing the
number who engage in at least 30
minutes of moderate intensity level
sport at least three times a week by
3%. For this sub-target, priority groups
are defined as women, people with
a disability, people from lower socioeconomic groups, and people from
ethnic minorities.

Project description
About two-thirds of men and threequarters of women do less than the
recommended 30 minutes of
moderate intensity activity a day on
at least five days per week. The less
well off are less active. Some regions
of the UK are significantly less active
than others. Through this target we
aim to tackle these trends.
This target will be delivered through
Sport England. The range of
interventions comprises:
marketing sport and promoting
its benefits;

driving up standards of local
authority service provision through
CPA/LAA/LPSA mechanisms; and
locally driven partnership projects
targeted at hard-to-reach groups.
Progress
Not yet assessed.
Sport England Delivery Plan in place.
New Funding Agreement, with strong
focus on the PSA target agreed.
Active People survey results
published in December 2006 provide
a detailed picture of participation at
regional and local levels.

building capacity in the network
of development/outreach workers,
clubs, coaches and volunteers;

Latest outturn data
Not yet assessed.

building infrastructure through
innovative facilities projects;

This target will be measured by the
Department’s new survey, Taking Part.
In December 2006, the baseline for
each priority group was set as below.

improving performance
measurement at local level, notably
through the Active People survey;

Participation in active sport by priority group during the past four weeks
At least one active sport (%)

Percentage range*

Black and minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
Women

53.3
32.3
43.4
47.7

51.1-55.5
31.0-33.6
42.3-44.5
46.7-48.7

All adults

53.7

53.0-54.5

The first indication of progress against
the baseline will be available in
summer 2007. It will be published
on the Taking Part website.

* Using 95% confidence interval. Figures have been rounded to one decimal place

Participation in moderate intensity level sport by priority group during the last week
At least one active sport (%)

Percentage range*

Black and minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic
Women

19.2
9.5
15.2
18.5

17.5-20.9
8.7-10.3
14.4-16.0
17.7-19.3

All adults

20.9

20.3-21.6

*Using 95% confidence interval. Figures have been rounded to one decimal place

DCMS Annual Report 2007

43

Participation
in the arts

The ACE delivery strand comprises
the following key elements:

Indicator
Increasing the number of people from
priority groups who participate in arts
activity at least twice a year by 2%
and increasing the number who
attend arts events at least twice a
year by 3%. For this sub-target,
priority groups are defined as people
with a disability, people from lower
socio-economic groups, and people
from ethnic minorities.
Project description
Breaking down barriers to access
and exploiting the full wealth of UK
culture have been key to our strategies
in recent years.
This target will primarily be delivered
through Arts Council England (ACE),
but we are also engaging with nonDCMS delivery agents to increase
participation across the sector as
a whole.

the utilisation of funding agreements
with Regularly Funded Organisations
(RFOs) and in turn with third tier
organisations to drive progress in
delivery for priority groups;
targets for Lottery Capital and
Grants for the Arts distribution;
development of better business
models for arts organisations,
including strategies for increasing
participation and attendance at arts
events by priority groups; and
dissemination of lessons learnt and
best practice from previous pilot
programmes such as Decibel and the
New Audiences Programme, which
was a national action research
programme (1998-2004) designed
to test new approaches to building
and reaching new audiences, and
from new pilots as appropriate.

Attendance at arts events by priority group during the past 12 months
At least two events (%)

Percentage range*

Black and minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic

23.5
24.1
17.4

21.6-25.4
22.8-25.3
16.6-18.3

All adults

33.7

32.9-34.4

Progress
Not yet assessed
Revised and strengthened ACE
delivery plan incorporates lessons
learned from the experience of
SR2002 PSA 2.
New funding agreement aligns ACE
and DCMS strategic priorities with a
clear focus on PSA 3.
DCMS has commissioned a ‘demand
side’ research project to improve
understanding of involvement,
participation and demand in arts
and culture sectors which will be
followed by practical interventions.
Latest outturn data
Not yet assessed.
This target will be measured by the
Department’s new survey, Taking Part.
In December 2006, the baseline for
each priority group was set as below.

The first indication of progress against
the baseline will be available in
summer 2007. It will be published
on the Taking Part website.

*Using 95% confidence interval. Figures have been rounded to one decimal place

Participation in arts activities by priority group during the past 12 months
At least two activities (%)

Percentage range*

Black and minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic

20.8
18.9
15.3

19.1-22.5
17.8-20.1
14.5-16.1

All adults

24.1

23.4-24.8

*Using 95% confidence interval. Figures have been rounded to one decimal place

44

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Accessing museums
and galleries
Indicator
Increasing the number of people
from priority groups accessing
museums and galleries collections
by 2%. For this sub-target, priority
groups are defined as people with a
disability, people from lower socioeconomic groups, and people from
ethnic minorities.
Project description
We will continue to build on the
successful Renaissance in the Regions
framework and the work of the
national museums and galleries
programmes in increasing museum
visits and broadening audiences.

We will continue to build on the
progress that has been achieved to
date by:
continuing to deliver ‘Renaissance’
across to the Hub museums and so
increasing further the number of
visits from priority groups;

Progress
Not yet assessed.
DCMS continues to chair project
board meetings with Library
Association and museum
representation.

continuing to work with sponsored
national museums and galleries to
pursue particular programmes
aimed at priority groups; and

Mid-year review of Funding
Agreements is addressing the issue
of establishing specific performance
indicators for disability targets
amongst national museums.

building on work with sponsored
national museums and galleries to
foster partnerships with museums
and galleries in the regions aimed
at encouraging participation from
priority groups.

DCMS has commissioned a ‘demand
side’ research project to improve
understanding of involvement,
participation and demand in arts
and culture sectors which will be
followed by practical interventions.
Latest outturn data
Not yet assessed.

This will be strengthened by closer
working with museums outside of
the DCMS-sponsored museums to
share best practice and develop
joint programmes.

This target will be measured by the
Department’s new survey, Taking Part.
In December 2006, the baseline for
each priority group was set as below.

Attendance at museums and galleries by priority group during the past 12 months The first indication of progress against
the baseline will be available in
At least one visit (%)
Percentage range*
summer 2007. It will be published
on the Taking Part website.
Black and minority ethnic
35.5
33.1-37.8
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic

32.1
28.3

30.8-33.5
27.3-29.3

All adults

42.3

41.6-43.1

*Using 95% confidence interval. Figures have been rounded to one decimal place

DCMS Annual Report 2007

1 December 2006 marked the fifth
anniversary of free entry to national
museums and galleries. There has been
an 83% increase in all visits (not just
from priority groups) to formerly
charging museums since 2001,
representing an extra 6.5 million
visits in 2006.

45

Accessing historic
environments

practice and develop joint programmes
where possible.

Indicator
Increasing the number of people
from priority groups visiting
designated historic environment sites
by 3%. For this sub-target, priority
groups are defined as people with a
disability, people from lower socioeconomic groups, and people from
ethnic minorities.
Project description
English Heritage (EH) as DCMS’s
NDPB will work across the sector to
provide support both to the sector
and DCMS to deliver the target.
EH will continue to attract new users
to the historic and built environment
through established marketing and
events, which are proven to be the
most effective drivers for increasing
access. EH will work to strengthen its
links with non-DCMS sponsored
heritage organisations to share best

This will be achieved through a variety
of different programmes and activities:
increasing visitor focus at English
Heritage properties;
using the expansion of Heritage
Open Days and the Blue Plaques
Scheme to broaden access at the
local community level;
attracting new visitors to English
Heritage sites;
specific projects run by English
Heritage, including outreach,
education and events programmes;

Progress
Not yet assessed.
EH’s New Funding Agreement has a
strong emphasis on the PSA target.
DCMS has commissioned a ‘demand
side’ research project to improve
understanding of involvement,
participation and demand in arts
and culture sectors which will be
followed by practical interventions.
Latest outturn data
Not yet assessed.
This target will be measured by the
Department’s new survey, Taking Part.
In December 2006, the baseline for
each priority group was set as below.

national projects, including projects
run by others but supported through
English Heritage’s grant
programmes; and
DCMS providing ministerial
support for conferences and
activities, i.e. Your Place or Mine
and Heritage Counts.

Attendance at designated historic environment sites by priority group during
the past 12 months
At least one visit (%)

Percentage range*

Black and minority ethnic
Limiting disability
Lower socio-economic

50.7
59.5
57.1

48.2-53.1
58.0-61.0
55.9-58.3

All adults

69.9

69.1-70.6

The first indication of progress against
the baseline will be available in
summer 2007. It will be published
on the Taking Part website.

*Using 95% confidence interval. Figures have been rounded to one decimal place

46

DCMS Annual Report 2007

SR2004 Performance Report PSA 4

PSA 4 Target
By 2008, improve the
productivity of the tourism,
creative and leisure industries.
The DCMS seeks to support this
objective at a microeconomic level,
with key projects designed to impact
on its sponsored industries. These take
two forms: research aimed at
understanding drivers of performance
in the industries; and policies informed
by the research and other evidence.
The impact of these projects will be
measured and assessed through
analysis of the contribution the
tourism, creative and leisure industries
make to UK productivity. The final
results for this PSA will not be known
until the data for 2005 becomes
available in June/July 2007. The graph
and table on pages 37/38 show that
the target has been met for both
creative industries and tourism and
other leisure industries, however this
result is based on provisional 2005
figures and is subject to change.
Progress on projects that support the
target is described below.

Implementation of
the Licensing Act
Project description
This legislation reformed and
streamlined archaic licensing laws,
strengthening competition and
increasing choice and flexibility
for consumers while providing
a greater degree of local and
appropriate regulation and
minimising harmful practices.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Progress
On course.
The Act was implemented on
24 November 2005.
200,000 businesses have been
operating under the new regime
for over 12 months.
The Fees Review Panel, set up to
ensure that fees are set at the right
level for local government and
licensees, produced its final report
at the end of November.
Monitoring and evaluation of
implementation underway since
November 2005 – positive signs,
though it remains too early to
draw conclusions.
Scrutiny councils initiative finalised
– positive final report published in
May 2006. The scrutiny council
initiative involved a small,
representative group of 10 licensing
authorities to help DCMS monitor
and evaluate the new regime.
Initial guidance review is complete –
the public consultation on the Main
Review Guidance began in January
and ended on 11 April 2007.
Alcohol Strategy Group, chaired
by the Home Office, is assessing
progress with the Alcohol Harm
Reduction Strategy.
Better Regulation Simplification Plan,
with key indicator baselines, was
published in December 2006 and
implementation is underway.

Implementation of
the Gambling Act
Project description
When implemented, the Gambling Act
will replace most existing gambling
law. It will extend to the whole of
Great Britain. It puts in place an
improved, more comprehensive
structure of gambling regulation, and
creates a new independent regulatory
body – the Gambling Commission.
Currently, we are working towards
1 September 2007 as the target date
for full implementation of the Act. The
main tasks that need to be completed
to meet this target are:
establishment of the Gambling
Commission, its relocation to
Birmingham and the development
of its approach to regulation;
Parliamentary approval for the
secondary legislation necessary for
full implementation of the Act;
continued work with licensing
authorities;
establishment of an independent
advisory panel that will provide
advice to the Secretary of State
about which licensing authorities
should have the power to issue
licences for casinos; and
a programme of research into the
prevalence of gambling and problem
gambling, and its causes.

47

Progress
On course.
The Gambling Commission was
established in October 2005 and is
operating effectively.
The timetable for the programme of
secondary legislation was published
in April 2006.
Programme management structures
and governance are in place, geared
towards close working with licensing
authorities and industry stakeholders.
The Independent Casino Advisory
Panel established and operating
effectively since October 2005.
Secretariat strengthened in July
2006. The panel published its final
report on 30 January 2007 and
work is underway to secure the
Parliamentary passage of the
consequent secondary legislation.
Gambling Prevalence Study 200607 underway and due to report
in 2007.
All the legislation necessary to allow
both the Gambling Commission and
Local Authorities to assume their
main duties has now been laid.

Digital Switchover
implementation
Project description
The Government is committed to
achieving switchover in the UK by
2012, starting substantively in 2008
but with project Whitehaven in
autumn 2007. It has also confirmed
the region-by-region timetable and
the scope of the Digital Switchover
Help Scheme which will be established
to help the over-75s and those
with significant disabilities make
the switch.

48

Digital UK, an independent
organisation set up by the public
sector broadcasters and multiplex
operators with representation from
the digital television supply chain,
will co-ordinate the switchover to
digital television.
Progress
On course.
Digital UK fully established
and operational.
Programme structure and project
plans for each work-strand are in
place. Roles and responsibilities of
each party agreed. Proactive approach
to risk management embedded.
Proportion of households that have
adopted digital TV for at least one
set stands at 73.3% (Ofcom Q3
2006 estimate).
The Help Scheme work-strand is
proceeding to procurement but
details of the governance of the
scheme will be settled as part of
the conclusion of the BBC Licence
Fee Settlement.
Cost benefit analysis shows
quantifiable customer benefits
of around £1.1 – £2.2 billion in
the period up to 2026 (in net
present value).

Tourism projects

The work is being managed as a
programme because of the complex
interdependencies between the
different projects. Although our overall
success for the purposes of this PSA
will be measured in terms of headline
tourism productivity increases, it will
not be possible to prove the cause and
effect between one programme of
work and certain amount of
productivity gain.
Progress
On course.
Complex delivery chains and
interdependencies. Largely rests
on the ability to influence other
departments, local and regional
partners and the industry.
Overarching delivery programme
plan in place, supported by
individual project plans.
Work on four strategic priority
areas (marketing/e-tourism, quality,
skills and data) progressing through
to 2008.
Tourism 2012 consultation launched
and completed in November 2006,
analysis of responses underway,
and Strategy to be delivered from
May 2007.
Continuing work underway on
how to measure the impact of
DCMS interventions.

Project description
We are taking forward work with our
delivery partners that will focus on
investment, skills and competition,
innovation and enterprise. Resulting
projects will be complemented by a
number of enabling programmes and
other activities, which will provide us
with knowledge, infrastructure and
influence needed to underpin our
Programme. Projects will be evaluated
in light of their conclusions.
DCMS Annual Report 2007

Creative industries
projects
Project description
The Creative Economy Programme
(CEP) was launched in November
2005. It aims to contribute to
delivering increased productivity
in creative industries sectors by
identifying key interventions for
Government. This includes:
seven themed CEP working
groups tasked with making
recommendations to Government,
looking at: competition and
intellectual property, technology,
diversity, business support and
access to finance, education and
skills, infrastructure, and evidence
and analysis;
extensive consultation including
multiple industry consultation
events and an online exercise to
gather views from stakeholders
and industry; and

Progress
On course.
Connections are being made to
other cross-Government work
including the Business Support
Simplification Programme, the
Roberts Review on Creativity in
Schools, the Cox report, the
Technology Strategy Board and work
on non-technological innovation.

Latest outturn data
The final results for this PSA will not
be known until the data for 2005
becomes available in June/July 2007.
The graph and table on pages 37/38
show that the target has been met for
both creative industries and tourism
and other leisure industries, however
this result is based on provisional 2005
figures and is subject to change.

CEP will develop the strategic
framework for delivering
increased productivity.
Working Group papers published
in December 2006.
Initial industry consultation events
and an online consultation exercise
have been completed and second
round of industry summits now
underway. CEP on track for
publication of Green Paper in
summer 2007.
Work Foundation commission
completed by April 2007.

production of a strategy for better
data on the creative sectors.
Additionally, the previously
established, Intellectual Property
Rights (IPR) and Film projects
(including the Film Co-production
Review) sit within the CEP.
The CEP has a complex and long
delivery chain, with the sector mainly
being comprised of small businesses.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

49

Taking Part
Taking Part is a continuous national
survey, achieving an annual sample
size of around 29,000, commissioned
by the Department and its partner
non-departmental public bodies
(NDPBs). The fieldwork for Taking
Part is being conducted by BMRB
Social Research.
The data will allow robust
measurement of the Departmental
PSA target on increasing participation
and attendance amongst priority
groups. In the past, DCMS has not
been able to report on progress
against similar targets with the same
level of confidence over accuracy that
will be provided by Taking Part. The
survey will also provide the data
around which DCMS, our NDPBs
and the wider cultural and sporting
communities will be able to develop
better research and analysis across
our sectors.

Public Accounts
Committee
recommendations
Tackling childhood obesity
The Public Accounts Committee
published its report on tackling
childhood obesity on 25 January 2007.
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/
cm200607/cmselect/cmpubacc/157/
15702.htm
A joint response from DCMS, the
Department of Health and the
Department for Education and Skills
was published on 29 March 2007
on HM Treasury’s website.
www.official-documents.gov.uk/
document/cm70/7020/7020.asp

Further details, including latest
outputs, can be found on our website.
www.culture.gov.uk/reference_library/
research/taking_part_survey/

50

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Efficiency
Efficiency gains
The table below illustrates DCMS’s
target to deliver £262 million of
efficiency gains by 2007-08.
As agreed with HM Treasury and the
Office for Government Commerce,
data on efficiency gains are collected
every six months from our NDPBs.
NDPBs’ and Local Authorities’
efficiency plans have been carefully
scrutinised to ensure that proposed
measures represent genuine
efficiencies and not cuts in services.
Similarly, different bodies’ outputs
(including productivity or quality
measures) are also monitored to
ensure that services are not being
cut, as a result of the efficiency
programme.Various measures will be
used to ensure this, including progress
towards meeting Public Service
Agreement (PSA) targets, customer
satisfaction surveys and Key
Performance Indicators.

Further details are set out in the
Department’s Efficiency Technical
Note and Autumn Performance Report,
available on our website.
Headcount and relocation
DCMS has a target to reduce its own
workforce by 27 posts (approximately
5%) by 2008 and to relocate 600
posts in its NDPBs outside London
and the South East by 2010.
Headcount reductions will take place
as part of the natural turnover of staff,
without the need for redundancies.
The relocation project has identified
over 900 posts to be moved from
London and the South East. As of
31 March 2007 DCMS has reduced
headcount by 19 and has relocated
517 posts.

Better Regulation
DCMS’s Better Regulation Unit is a
point of liaison between us and the
Better Regulation Executive and aims
to raise quality and standards across
Departmental regulatory business.
DCMS fully complies with the Cabinet
Office’s Better Policy Making: A Guide
to Regulatory Impact Assessments.
Regulatory Impact Assessments have
been produced when required.

Further details are set out in our
Efficiency Technical Note and Autumn
Performance Report, available on
our website.

DCMS efficiency figures, £millions
2005-06
Gains

2006-07
Gains

2007-08
Target

Internal

0.0

1.0

2

NDPBs

73.0

130.7

114

34.9

52.9

45

3.1

13.3

14

Strategic bodies

35.0

64.5

55

Local Authorities

44.7

84.6

146

117.7

216.3

262

Sector

of which
Museums and galleries
Heritage

Total gains

DCMS Annual Report 2007

51

Capability review
DCMS was part of the third group of
Government departments to undergo
a capability review. These reviews are
undertaken by the Prime Minister’s
Delivery Unit and an external
Capability Review Team that includes
successful, nationally recognised
business and wider public sector
leaders as well as board level members
from other government departments.
Their report was put to the DCMS
Board on 31 January 2007 and the
final report, including the DCMS
response, was published on 27
March 2007.
We will take forward the findings of
the review through our transformation
action plan. This will enable us to say,
by mid-2008, that:
we understand clearly how we
add value;
the Department’s leadership is
decisive, corporate and visible;

The report and the DCMS
transformation action plan can
be found on the DCMS website.
www.culture.gov.uk/reference_library/
publications/archive_2007/capability_
review.htm

Correspondence
figures
In July 2006 DCMS introduced
a central Correspondence and
Information Briefing Unit, to help
improve the efficiency with which
we handle requests for information.
DCMS received 9,102 letters from
the public that required a response
in 2006. 7,449 of these (81.8%) were
answered within our 20 working day
target.We also received 4,199 letters
from MPs and Peers. 3,569 of these
required a response, and 76.4% were
answered within our 20 working
day target.

relationships with our NDPBs are
based on strategic collaboration;
staff are fully engaged in the
transformation;
we have reorganised DCMS to
focus on where we add value and
to support the new relationships
with NDPBs; and
we have improved how we recruit
and allocate staff and how we
manage their development.

52

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Managing
resources

DCMS Annual Report 2007

53

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Organisation chart April 2007

Rt Hon Tessa Jowell MP
Secretary of State for
Culture, Media and Sport,
Minister for the Olympics

David Lammy MP
Minister for Culture

Shaun Woodward MP
Minister for Creative
Industries and Tourism

Jonathan Stephens
Permanent Secretary

Jeff Jacobs
Chief Executive
Government Olympic Executive

Vacant
Director,
Finance

Olympics
Programme
Management
Liz Underhill

Andrew Lean
Director

Shaun Cove

Andrew Ramsay
Director General, Culture,
Creativity and Economy

Nicky Roche
Director

Alex Towers

Anita
Charlesworth
Director, Active
Generation

Sport
Paul Heron
PE, School
Sport and Club
Links Project
Vacant
Childhood
Obesity
Programme
Tony Armstrong
(based at DoH)

David Howarth
Olympic Board
Programme
Support Unit

54

Mark Camley
Royal Parks
Agency

Alan Davey
Director,
Culture

Arts
Paul Kirkman
Museums,
Libraries and
Cultural Property
Keith Nichol

Jon Zeff
Director,
Broadcasting

Digital
Switchover
Keith Smith

Government
Art Collection
Penny Johnson
Architecture
and Historic
Environment
Harry Reeves
Humanitarian
Assistance
Frances MacLeod

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Nick Bent
Special Adviser

Nigel Warner
Special Adviser

Clive Elphick
Non-Executive Director

Rt Hon Richard Caborn MP
Minister for Sport

Parminder Vir
Non-Executive Director

Nicholas Holgate
Chief Operating Officer

Gambling and
Lottery Licensing
Matthew Hill
Lottery,
Communities
and International
Simon Broadley

Brian Leonard
Director,
Industry

David Roe
Director,
Strategy

Creative Industries
Phil Clapp

Public Bodies
Janet Evans

Tourism, Economic
Impact and Licensing
Andrew Cunningham

Evidence
and Analysis
Paula Crofts and
Ian Wood

Paddy Feeny
Director,
Communications

Human and
Business Resources
Ros Brayfield
Private Office
Rita Patel
Finance
and Planning
Mark Ferrero

Patrick
Kilgarriff
Director, Legal

News
Linda Martin
Communications
Penny Dolby
Information Systems
Mark O’Neill
Central Information
and Briefing Unit
Harvey Vasey

Key
DCMS Agency:
DCMS Board member:
Policy Sponsorship:

DCMS Annual Report 2007

55

Senior Civil Servants Consultancy
and publicity
Thirty-three Senior Civil Servants were
in post at 1 April 2006. Details of their
salaries are below:
Salary band £

Number of staff

£55,000 – 59,999

7

£60,000 – 64,999

6

£65,000 – 69,999

5

£70,000 – 74,999

2

Over £75,000

13

Recruitment
DCMS has systems in place to ensure
that recruitment is carried out on the
basis of fair and open competition and
selection on merit, in accordance with
the recruitment code laid down by the
Civil Service Commissioners.
Further details about our recruitment
process can be found on our website.
www.culture.gov.uk/working_with_us/
recruitment/

Consultants bring a huge range of skills
and experience to the Department
and help support both the efficient
administration and the programmes
we deliver. DCMS spent £861,126
on consultancy in 2006-07 against a
forecast of £825,000. Many projects
that require consultants are arranged
at short notice in order to address
specific issues, making accurate
forecasts difficult.
DCMS spent £714,443 on publicity
in 2006-07.

Health and safety
The Health and Safety Committee
continues to meet on a regular basis
to receive reports from appointed
officers, make recommendations and
sanction future activities. Regular
building inspections are carried out
and any maintenance work with a
health or safety requirement is given
priority. First aid training is provided
to volunteers and security guards.

Public appointments
DCMS is responsible for over 550
appointments to around six different
boards. Most are national bodies with
a high public profile and the majority
are regulated by the Commissioner
for Public Appointments.
Further details can be found in our
Public Appointments Plan, available
on our website.
www.culture.gov.uk/working_with_us/
public_appointments/

56

Sustainable
development

Further details can be found in the
Sustainable Development Action Plan,
available on our website.We will
be publishing our Sustainable
Development Action Plan for 2007-08
in June 2007.
www.culture.gov.uk/working_with_us/
sustainable_development/

Equality and
diversity
In December 2006, DCMS published
its Equality Scheme, incorporating its
Race Equality Scheme, Disability
Equality Scheme, Gender Equality
Scheme and Northern Ireland Equality
Scheme. This sets out our action plan
for equality and diversity. Progress
against this action plan is overseen by
the Director of Strategy, who is the
DCMS Board diversity champion. The
scheme was reviewed in advance of
the gender duty coming into effect
on 30 April 2007.
Further details, including employment
statistics, can be found in the Equality
Scheme, available on our website.
www.culture.gov.uk/working_with_us/
equality_diversity.htm

Our plans for implementing
sustainable development within DCMS
and among our sponsored bodies are
set out in our first Sustainable
Development Action Plan, published
in March 2006. Progress against this
action plan is overseen by the Director
of Strategy, who is the DCMS Board
sustainable development champion.
The Sustainable Development
Commission recently assessed the
plan as ‘gaining momentum’.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Public bodies
As of 31 March 2007, DCMS is
responsible for 63 public bodies
that help deliver the Department’s
strategic aim and objectives. These
include three public corporations, two
public broadcasting authorities, one
executive agency and 57 nondepartmental public bodies (NDPBs).
NDPBs fall into three categories:
executive, advisory and tribunal.
However, NDPB is often used within
DCMS to mean all of our sponsored
bodies. Over 95% of our expenditure
is channelled through these bodies.
A breakdown of grant-in-aid
expenditure on our sponsored bodies
is provided overleaf.
The relationship between DCMS and
our public bodies is a balance between
independence and accountability.
Public bodies perform functions
best carried out at arms length from
government. For example, some are
regulators, and must be seen to be
independent of political interests.
Others need specialised expertise not
found in general public administration.
Public bodies also spend public money,
from the Exchequer or from the
National Lottery, and are therefore
accountable to the public, Ministers
and Parliament.While they should
have a large measure of freedom to
determine how they operate, they
need to do so within the framework
of policies and priorities developed by
the sponsor department and agreed
by Parliament.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

That framework is encapsulated in the
following key documents, one of more
of which apply to most of our bodies:
the Public Service Agreements
(PSAs) set out our aims and
objectives, which encompass the
work of all our public bodies, and
our key targets. Details of our PSAs
can be found on page 33;
the funding agreement supports the
PSA by explaining what each body
will deliver for the public funding
allocated to it, and why; the
agreement, signed every two years
by the Chair of the body and the
Secretary of State, summarises
strategy, key activities, and outputs
to be delivered;
the management statement and
financial memorandum sets out
the rules and guidelines that a public
body should observe in carrying
out its functions; it is reviewed
periodically, but the content remains
fairly constant.
For the National Lottery distributing
bodies, policy and financial directions
and a statement of financial
requirements set out rules on the
treatment of Lottery proceeds,
particularly where this differs from
the treatment of Exchequer funds.
All the public corporations, public
broadcasting authorities and executive
NDPBs are required to produce annual
reports and accounts that are either
laid before Parliament or placed in the
Library of the House of Commons.

Further information on these public
bodies (including how to obtain copies
of their annual report and accounts)
and an explanation of the
characteristics of the different types
of public bodies can be found in the
DCMS Public Bodies Directory 2007
on the DCMS website.
www.culture.gov.uk/about_us/
sponsored_bodies/
We share responsibility with the
Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI) for Ofcom (a public corporation)
and the Design Council (an executive
NDPB). Further information on these
bodies can be found on the DTI website.
DCMS provides an annual grant of
£16.1 million to the Royal Household
for the maintenance of the Occupied
Royal Palaces, for Royal
Communications and Information and
for the maintenance of Marlborough
House. The Occupied Royal Palaces
are the palaces currently used by
The Queen or members of the
Royal Family. These are:
Buckingham Palace
Windsor Castle
St James’s Palace
Clarence House
The residential areas of
Kensington Palace
For more information visit the official
website of the British Monarchy.
www.royal.gov.uk

57

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Detailed allocation: NDPB grant-in-aid

£ Thousands

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

Museums, galleries and libraries

451,834

484,907

513,032

39,856

42,929

44,823

of which:
British Museum
Natural History Museum

41,470

44,082

45,090

Imperial War Museum

18,541

20,613

22,177

National Gallery

21,986

24,041

25,566

National Maritime Museum

15,236

17,008

18,411

National Museums Liverpool

18,155

21,203

21,576

6,448

7,031

7,168

National Portrait Gallery
National Museum of Science and Industry

34,113

39,225

38,484

Tate Gallery

31,799

34,124

35,929

Victoria & Albert Museum

38,233

39,112

41,777

Wallace Collection

2,580

3,528

4,156

Royal Armouries

7,369

7,814

8,312

Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester

3,870

4,215

4,171

Museum of London

6,632

7,931

8,809

Sir John Soane’s Museum

1,291

1,115

1,008

Horniman Museum

3,682

3,932

4,350

Geffrye Museum

1,431

1,740

1,859

Tyne and Wear Museums

1,710

1,863

2,326

National Coal Mining Museum of England

2,539

2,528

2,659

People’s History Museum
British Library
Public Lending Right
Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
Arts

150

156

164

100,568

102,639

104,411

7,471

7,702

7,682

14,264

15,793

14,521

408,305

427,861

416,955

of which:
Arts Council England
Sport

408,305

422,361

410,455

135,297

156,669

180,229

104,627

102,500

115,963

29,305

52,995

63,005

of which:
Sport England
UK Sports Council
Football Licensing Authority
London 2012 – Olympic Delivery Authority

58

1,365

1,174

1,261

–

106,026

175,000

DCMS Annual Report 2007

£ Thousands

2005-06

2006-07

2007-08

Historic buildings, monuments and sites

164,102

161,788

166,997

of which:
English Heritage

133,121

133,511

133,136

Churches Conservation Trust

3,062

3,062

3,062

National Heritage Memorial Fund

5,002

5,002

10,002

Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment

4,690

3,690

4,690

Royal Household
Tourism

18,227

16,523

16,107

52,500

53,500

53,500

of which:
VisitBritain
Broadcasting and media

48,900

49,900

49,900

31,660

29,480

27,010

28,760

26,610

24,110

2,900

2,870

2,900

of which:
UK Film Council
National Film and Television School
Regional Cultural Consortiums

1,810

1,632

1,885

National Lottery Commission

7,562

9,200

14,001

12,132

18,741

4,220

Gambling Commission

DCMS Annual Report 2007

59

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Resource budget: Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL)

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

1,006,102

1,227,239

1,224,728

1,325,784

1,422,398

1,624,668

1,563,766

302,227

423,595

446,039

441,534

482,561

595,737

547,636

£ Thousands
Resource DEL
DCMS
of which:
Museums, galleries and libraries
of which:
Museums and galleries

172,640

281,973

313,272

310,509

364,077

405,465

414,357

Libraries

115,568

126,012

119,213

117,954

97,544

137,922

119,353

13,104

15,357

12,776

12,218

18,283

49,777

13,926

915

253

778

853

2,657

2,573

–

254,161

285,740

328,618

366,955

406,851

424,490

420,751

67,381

122,594

66,143

106,459

120,646

155,210

170,130

67,381

122,594

66,143

100,001

116,589

121,639

166,530

Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
Culture Online
Arts
Sport
of which:
Sports and recreation
Olympics
Architecture and the historic environment
Regional Cultural Consortiums
The Royal Parks Agency
Tourism
Broadcasting and media
Commemorative services (Queen’s Golden Jubilee)
Administration and research
Unallocated provision

–

–

–

6,458

4,057

33,571

3,600

132,848

142,133

152,985

162,056

146,406

179,129

159,117

–

–

–

1,501

1,650

1,910

1,885

41,854

25,671

25,706

26,660

31,122

19,507

19,112

68,250

73,446

53,039

50,349

51,202

51,808

54,424

106,517

107,592

108,472

124,981

121,811

120,686

120,380

417

6,494

–

–

–

–

–

33,176

37,914

41,546

42,393

48,515

54,514

50,759

–

–

–

–

4,829

8,954

17,039

Gambling and gaming bodies

-729

2,060

2,180

2,896

6,805

12,723

2,533

National Lottery

-350

130

-156

100

497

-238

181

1,005,752

1,227,369

1,224,572

1,325,884

1,422,895

1,624,430

1,563,947

871,415

1,078,171

1,084,087

1,196,983

1,269,628

1,448,120

1,375,338

Pay

316,841

376,167

403,706

441,534

446,101

469,046

Procurement

116,440

170,820

197,242

185,672

237,858

274,371

316,454

Current grants and subsidies to the private
sector and abroad

359,317

438,967

397,922

475,660

489,234

589,316

571,502

2,000

12,000

–

1,900

4,218

23,145

3,477

74,414

68,861

67,522

52,340

80,311

97,771

101,730

Total resource budget DEL
of which:
Near-cash
of which:†

Current grants to local authorities
Depreciation

60

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Resource budget: Annually Managed Expenditure (AME)

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

2,230,000

2,534,030

2,963,763

2,487,054

2,537,000

2,722,000

2,811,000

–

1,522

317,641

1,798

–

–

–

£ Thousands
Resource AME
DCMS
of which:
Museums, galleries and libraries
of which:
Museums and galleries

–

–

1,747

1,798

–

–

–

Libraries

–

1,522

315,894

–

–

–

–

–

–

1,003

–

–

–

–

Sport
of which:

–

–

1,003

–

–

–

–

Architecture and the historic environment

Sports and recreation

–

550

195,500

–

–

–

–

Tourism

–

1,381

-1,381

256

–

–

–

2,230,000

2,530,577

2,451,000

2,485,000

2,537,000

2,722,000

2,811,000

897,880

651,694

662,237

608,038

789,772

713,504

628,070

National Lottery

897,880

651,694

662,237

608,038

789,772

691,504

605,070

Olympic Lottery

–

–

–

–

–

22,000

23,000

3,127,880

3,185,724

3,626,000

3,095,092

3,326,772

3,435,504

3,439,070

3,109,798

3,148,734

3,613,952

3,084,974

3,342,587

3,409,928

3,408,001

Broadcasting and media
National Lottery
of which:

Total resource budget AME
of which:
Near-cash
of which:†
Pay
Procurement
Current grants and subsidies to the private
sector and abroad
Current grants to local authorities
Depreciation
Total resource budget

712,000

764,000

804,619

843,000

825,000

834,000

1,818,000

2,167,000

2,139,381

2,157,256

2,279,000

2,383,000

2,435,000

897,880

644,694

662,237

608,038

789,772

713,504

628,070

46,918

29,391

54,571

56,882

50,815

44,424

38,931

33,000

33,000

34,000

34,000

35,000

35,000

35,000

4,133,632

4,413,093

4,850,572

4,420,976

4,749,667

5,059,934

5,003,017

Notes:
† The breakdown of near-cash in Resource DEL by economic category may exceed the total
near-cash Resource DEL reported above because of other income and receipts that score in
near-cash Resource DEL but aren’t included as pay, procurement, or current grants and
subsidies to the private sector, abroad and local authorities.

Figures in this table are in a new format separating Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL) and
Annually Managed Expenditure (AME). Overall figure may differ from previous years as a result of:
1. A change in the classification of profit and loss on the disposal of assets – amounts now
recorded as Capital.
2. DCMS and Treasury undertook at complete overhaul of the way Lottery expenditure is
recorded. For COFOG purposes each lottery distribution body is recorded separately,
the exercise offered an opportunity to remove erroneously recorded data.
Please see additional notes on page 72.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

61

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Capital budget: Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL)

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

32,680

27,972

123,453

153,548

144,459

243,769

401,827

17,964

-13,685

47,333

76,937

58,947

51,974

131,220

Museums and galleries

5,122

-29,142

28,612

41,672

14,075

36,366

71,952

Libraries

1,686

5,715

2,165

7,900

10,513

12,083

27,218

11,156

9,742

15,895

24,325

29,144

50

32,050

–

–

661

3,040

5,215

3,475

–

£ Thousands
Capital DEL
DCMS
of which:
Museums, galleries and libraries
of which:

Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
Culture Online
Arts

1,224

1,551

2,876

942

6,639

7,444

373

Sport

1,194

17,024

44,276

49,772

44,201

148,508

211,334

Sports and recreation

615

6,924

3,238

22,189

6,413

46,977

36,334

Space for sports and arts

579

10,100

41,038

27,583

2,100

–

–

–

–

–

–

35,688

101,531

175,000

10,382

17,700

20,245

19,487

23,445

11,376

40,884

The Royal Parks Agency

118

1,425

4,987

2,562

1,463

555

1,880

Tourism

662

1,158

451

764

298

300

600

Broadcasting and media

400

1,738

2,040

739

3,072

8,392

2,040

Administration and research

735

1,061

1,220

2,345

5,820

10,315

4,495

–

–

–

–

–

–

9,000

of which:

Olympics
Architecture and the historic environment

Unallocated provision
Gambling and gaming bodies
National Lottery
Total capital budget DEL

1

–

25

–

574

4,905

1

489

57

72

–

67

62

10

33,169

28,029

123,525

153,548

144,526

243,831

401,837

of which:
Capital expenditure on fixed assets net of sales†

13,202

-8,513

47,050

65,261

55,543

90,650

104,000

Capital grants to the private sector and abroad

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Net lending to private sector

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Capital support to public corporations

–

–

90

90

–

–

90

Capital support to local authorities††

–

–

–

10,045

39,373

105,191

175,147

62

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Capital budget: Annually Managed Expenditure (AME)

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

145,620

122,000

4,000

88,000

94,000

94,000

80,000

26,620

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

£ Thousands
Capital AME
DCMS
of which:
Museums, galleries and libraries
of which:
26,620

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

Broadcasting and media

Museums and galleries

119,000

112,000

-6,000

78,000

94,000

84,000

70,000

National Lottery

719,555

1,011,018

1,098,737

942,836

898,014

873,329

777,167

National Lottery

719,555

1,011,018

1,098,737

942,836

898,014

785,329

687,167

Olympic Lottery

–

–

–

–

–

88,000

90,000

Total capital budget AME

865,175

1,133,018

1,102,737

1,030,836

992,014

967,329

857,167

Total capital budget

898,344

1,161,047

1,226,262

1,184,384

1,136,540

1,211,160

1,259,004

Capital expenditure on fixed assets net of sales†

158,822

113,487

51,050

153,261

149,543

184,650

184,000

Less depreciation†††

107,414

101,861

101,522

86,340

115,311

167,771

136,730

51,408

11,626

-50,472

66,921

34,232

16,879

47,270

of which:

of which:

Net capital expenditure on tangible fixed assets
Notes:

† Expenditure by the department and NDPBs on land, buildings and equipment, net of sales.
Excludes spending on financial assets and grants, and public corporations’ capital expenditure.
†† This does not include loans written off by mutual consent that score within non-cash
Resource Budgets.
††† Included in Resource Budget.

Figures in this table are in a new format separating Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL) and
Annually Managed Expenditure (AME). Overall figure may differ from previous years as a result of:
1. A change in the classification of profit and loss on the disposal of assets – amounts now
recorded as Capital.
2. DCMS and Treasury undertook a complete overhaul of the way Lottery expenditure is
recorded. For COFOG purposes each lottery distribution body is recorded separately, the
exercise offered an opportunity to remove erroneously recorded data.
Please see additional notes on page 72.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

63

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Total departmental spending

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

1,006,102

1,227,239

1,224,728

1,325,784

1,422,398

1,624,668

1,563,766

-350

130

-156

100

497

-238

181

1,005,752

1,227,369

1,224,572

1,325,884

1,422,895

1,624,430

1,563,947

871,415

1,078,171

1,084,087

1,196,983

1,269,628

1,448,120

1,375,338

2,230,000

2,534,030

2,963,763

2,487,054

2,537,000

2,722,000

2,811,000

897,880

651,694

662,237

608,038

789,772

713,504

628,070

Total resource budget AME

3,127,880

3,185,724

3,626,000

3,095,092

3,326,772

3,435,504

3,439,070

of which: Near-cash

3,109,798

3,148,734

3,613,952

3,084,974

3,342,587

3,409,928

3,408,001

Total resource budget

4,133,632

4,413,093

4,850,572

4,420,976

4,749,667

5,059,934

5,003,017

of which: depreciation

107,414

101,861

101,522

86,340

115,311

167,771

136,730

32,680

27,972

123,453

153,548

144,459

243,769

401,827

489

57

72

–

67

62

10

33,169

28,029

123,525

153,548

144,526

243,831

401,837

145,620

122,000

4,000

88,000

94,000

94,000

80,000

£ Thousands
Resource budget
Resource DEL DCMS
National Lottery
Total resource budget DEL
of which: Near-cash
Resource AME DCMS
National Lottery

Capital budget
Capital DEL

DCMS
National Lottery

Total capital budget DEL
Capital AME

DCMS

719,555

1,011,018

1,098,737

942,836

898,014

873,329

777,167

Total capital budget AME

National Lottery

865,175

1,133,018

1,102,737

1,030,836

992,014

967,329

857,167

Total capital budget

898,344

1,161,047

1,226,262

1,184,384

1,136,540

1,211,160

1,259,004

DCMS

3,307,824

3,807,509

4,212,488

3,965,330

4,075,277

4,499,602

4,717,433

National Lottery

1,616,738

1,664,770

1,762,824

1,553,690

1,695,619

1,603,721

1,407,858

Total departmental spending†

4,924,562

5,472,279

5,975,312

5,519,020

5,770,896

6,103,323

6,125,291

Total departmental spending†

of which: Total DEL

964,507

1,186,537

1,280,575

1,427,092

1,487,110

1,770,490

1,864,054

Total AME

4,052,616

4,425,528

4,843,762

4,245,050

4,424,554

4,455,923

4,369,001

Spending by local authorities on functions relevant to the department
Current spending
of which: financed by grants from budgets above
Capital spending
of which: financed by grants from budgets above††

1,840,253

1,921,554

2,108,205

2,107,459

2,228,945

2,305,686

48,918

41,391

54,571

58,782

55,033

67,569

505,726

474,368

444,828

511,010

696,230

901,900

45,643

110,395

94,454

106,285

129,326

187,801

Notes:
† Total departmental spending is the sum of the resource budget and the capital budget less
depreciation. Similarly, total DEL is the sum of the resource budget DEL and capital budget
DEL less depreciation in DEL, and total AME is the sum of resource budget AME and capital
budget AME less depreciation in AME.
†† This includes loans written off by mutual consent that score within non-cash Resource
Budgets and aren’t included in the capital support to local authorities line in Table 3.

64

Figures in this table are in a new format separating Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL) and
Annually Managed Expenditure (AME), and DCMS and Lottery expenditure. Overall figures may
differ from previous year as a result of:
1. DCMS and Treasury undertook a complete overhaul of the way Lottery expenditure is
recorded. For Classification of the Functions of Government (COFOG) purposes each lottery
distribution body is recorded separately, the exercise offered an opportunity to remove
erroneously recorded data.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Capital employed

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

56

57

68

70

86

90

92

51

51

59

56

70

70

71

6

6

£ Millions
Assets on balance sheet
Fixed assets
of which:
Land and buildings
Debtors (> 1 year)
Current assets
Creditor (< 1 year)

36

81

59

42

35

59

67

-29

-96

-76

-52

-38

-44

-77

-4

-4

Creditor (> 1 year)
Provisions
Capital employed within main department

63

42

51

60

85

107

82

NDPB net assets

1,697

1,870

3,237

3,260

3,861

3,962

4,063

Total capital employed in departmental group

1,760

1,912

3,288

3,320

3,946

4,069

4,145

Notes:
1. Outturn figures are taken from the published consolidated DCMS resource accounts which include the
Royal Parks Agency accounts.
2. Figures for 2003-04 include the effects of the quinquennial revaluation of the land and buildings of the
museums and galleries sector.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

65

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Administration budget

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

Paybill

15,402

17,262

18,681

19,847

22,191

23,529

25,482

Other

16,639

19,107

22,909

22,789

26,968

28,121

25,673

32,041

36,369

41,590

42,636

49,159

51,650

51,155

£ Thousands
Adminstration expenditure

Total admistration
Expenditure
Administration income

-238

-241

-2,231

-2,151

-2,486

-1,003

-897

31,803

36,128

39,359

40,485

46,673

50,647

50,258

Arts and culture

7

10

11

11

13

13

13

Sport

6

4

4

5

7

7

7

Total administration budget
£ million
Analysis by activity

Government Olympic Executive

0

0

0

0

0

3

3

Tourism, libraries and communities

6

4

6

6

6

7

7

Creative industries, broadcasting and gambling

5

6

8

8

9

9

9

Administration

9

12

10

10

11

12

11

33

36

39

40

46

51

50

Total net administration costs

The real terms increase between 2001-02 and 2006-07 includes the creation of the Humanitarian Assistance Unit
and the Government Olympic Executive.

66

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Staff in post

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Estimated
Outturn

2007-08
Plans

400

460

506

510

507

525

495

12

10

12

10

12

10

10

412

470

518

520

519

535

505

Staff years
DCMS
FTEs
Overtime
Total
Royal Parks Agency
FTEs

220

234

232

127

121

92

92

Overtime

9

10

7

4

2

2

2

Casual

0

7

3

3

1

5

4

229

251

242

134

124

99

98

Total
Notes:

1. Until 2002-03 FTE data consisted of the staff in post averaged over the whole financial year. From 2003-04
onwards the data represents the number of staff in post (FTE) on the last day of the financial year.
2. The Royal Parks Agency (RPA) ceased to be subject to administration cost control from 2003-04. The fall in RPA staff
numbers from 242 in 2003-04 to 125 in 2005-06 is the result of a planned merger of the Royal Parks Constabulary
(RPC) with the Metropolitan Police. After the merger, RPC staff will no longer be Royal Parks Agency.
3. Agency temps are excluded from the figures.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

67

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Total spending by country and region

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

North East

167.3

134.4

179.4

155.0

141.5

131.5

118.4

North West

243.9

270.1

291.9

265.9

285.1

225.7

209.6

£ Million

Yorkshire and Humberside

237.9

231.1

271.1

203.7

234.8

235.7

218.7

East Midlands

164.5

179.0

193.4

204.7

152.7

177.1

166.0

West Midlands

182.7

202.3

337.0

188.6

214.4

233.9

218.6

Eastern

184.1

166.4

194.8

180.8

175.2

186.5

173.7

London

464.6

561.3

804.8

508.9

649.9

748.8

720.0

South East

257.5

284.2

325.0

305.8

272.0

299.2

282.0

South West

177.9

219.4

261.2

300.3

215.4

282.0

256.5

2,080.4

2,248.2

2,858.5

2,313.5

2,340.9

2,520.4

2,363.7

Total England
Scotland

196.7

201.5

181.3

218.8

238.7

180.3

159.6

Wales

190.4

198.7

205.7

236.4

222.7

244.1

228.9

67.4

71.1

72.7

63.5

95.9

98.2

87.7

2,534.9

2,719.5

3,318.2

2,832.1

2,898.2

3,043.1

2,839.8

Northern Ireland
Total UK identifiable expenditure
Outside UK

65.0

88.8

216.9

142.7

139.9

185.2

184.8

Total identifiable expenditure

2,599.8

2,808.3

3,535.0

2,974.9

3,038.1

3,228.3

3,024.6

Non-identifiable expenditure

2,284.0

2,661.0

2,531.0

2,647.0

2,677.0

2,822.0

2,864.5

Total expenditure on services

4,883.8

5,469.3

6,066.0

5,621.9

5,715.1

6,050.3

5,889.1

Notes:
The data presented in this table are consistent with the Country and Regional Analyses (CRA) published by HM Treasury in
Chapter 9 of Public Expenditure Statistical Analyses (PESA) 2007. The figures were taken from the HM Treasury public spending
database in December 2006 and the regional distributions were completed in January and February 2007. Therefore the tables
may not show the latest position and are not consistent with other tables in the Departmental Report.
The analyses are set within the overall framework of Total Expenditure on Services (TES). TES broadly represents the current and
capital expenditure of the public sector, with some differences from the national accounts measure Total Managed Expenditure.
The tables show the central government and public corporation elements of TES. They include current and capital spending by
the Department and its NDPBs, and public corporations’ capital expenditure, but do not include capital finance to public
corporations. They do not include payments to local authorities or local authorities’ own expenditure. TES is a near-cash
measure of public spending. The tables do not include depreciation, cost of capital charges, or movements in provisions that are
in Departmental budgets. They do include pay, procurement, capital expenditure, and grants and subsidies to individuals and
private sector enterprises.
Departmental spend, which is allocated on a regional basis, includes the grant to the Welsh Fourth Channel Authority, funding
of eight regional Cultural Consortia, and grant to the Greater London Authority. Some NDPBs sponsored by the Department
also allocated funding on a regional basis. For example, the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council allocates funding to
support regional museums and Arts Council England provides support to a portfolio of regularly funded regional organisations.
The data are based on a subset of spending – identifiable expenditure on services – which is capable of being analysed as being
for the benefit of individual countries and regions. Expenditure that is incurred for the benefit of the UK as a whole is excluded.
Tourism allocation has been reclassified from non-identifiable to identifiable expenditure.
Across Government, most expenditure is not planned or allocated on a regional basis. Social security payments, for example, are
paid to eligible individuals irrespective of where they live. Expenditure on other programmes is allocated by looking at how all
the projects across the Department’s area of responsibility, usually England, compare. So the analyses show the regional
outcome of spending decisions that on the whole have not been made primarily on a regional basis.

68

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Total spending per head by country and region

2001-02
Outturn

2002-03
Outturn

2003-04
Outturn

2004-05
Outturn

2005-06
Outturn

2006-07
Plans

2007-08
Plans

North East

65.9

53.0

70.6

60.9

55.3

51.5

46.3

North West

36.0

39.8

42.9

38.9

41.6

32.9

30.4

£ Million

Yorkshire and Humberside

47.8

46.3

54.1

40.4

46.4

46.2

42.6

East Midlands

39.3

42.4

45.5

47.8

35.5

40.9

38.1

West Midlands

34.6

38.1

63.3

35.4

40.0

43.5

40.6

Eastern

34.1

30.7

35.7

32.9

31.6

33.5

31.0

London

63.4

76.1

108.9

68.5

86.4

98.6

94.1

South East

32.1

35.3

40.2

37.7

33.3

36.5

34.2

South West

36.0

44.2

52.2

59.6

42.5

55.2

49.9

Total England

42.1

45.3

57.3

46.2

46.4

49.7

46.4

Scotland

38.8

39.9

35.9

43.1

46.8

35.3

31.2

Wales

65.4

68.0

70.0

80.1

75.3

82.0

76.6

Northern Ireland

39.9

41.9

42.7

37.1

55.6

56.7

50.3

Total UK identifiable expenditure

42.9

45.8

55.7

47.3

48.1

50.3

46.7

Notes:
The data presented in this table are consistent with the Country and Regional Analyses (CRA) published by HM Treasury in
Chapter 9 of Public Expenditure Statistical Analyses (PESA) 2007. The figures were taken from the HM Treasury public spending
database in December 2006 and the regional distributions were completed in January and February 2007. Therefore the tables
may not show the latest position and are not consistent with other tables in the Departmental Report.
Please see additional notes on page 68.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

69

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Spending by function or programme by country and region 2005-06

North
East

North Yorkshire &
West Humberside

East
Midlands

West
Midlands

Eastern

London

South
East

South
West

International services
International development
assistance

1.9

0.8

4.8

0.5

1.7

0.4

0.2

0.3

0.4

Total: international services

1.9

0.8

4.8

0.5

1.7

0.4

0.2

0.3

0.4

Support for business

0.9

2.5

1.3

1.2

2.4

2.5

24.6

5.4

2.8

Total: enterprise and
economic development

0.9

2.5

1.3

1.2

2.4

2.5

24.6

5.4

2.8

Enterprise and economic
development

Recreation, culture and religion
Broadcasting

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.3

0.1

0.1

Heritage, arts, libraries and films

58.3

81.2

76.5

64.6

81.0

72.0

249.2

116.6

80.6

Lottery

70.6

181.7

137.5

72.1

110.8

88.4

325.4

130.2

118.5

Other recreation, culture
and religion

2.6

5.0

4.2

2.7

3.8

3.2

10.9

4.8

3.9

Sport and recreation

7.2

13.7

10.5

11.4

14.7

8.7

39.3

14.6

9.2

Total: recreation,
culture and religion

138.7

281.8

228.7

151.0

210.3

172.3

625.1

266.3

212.2

Public sector
occupational pensions

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total: social protection

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

141.5

285.1

234.8

152.7

214.4

175.5

649.9

272.0

215.4

Social protection

TOTAL

70

DCMS Annual Report 2007

England

Scotland

Wales

Northern
Ireland

UK identifiable
expenditure

Outside
UK

Total identifiable
Nonexpenditure identifiable

£ Millions
totals

11.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

11.0

0.0

11.0

0.0

11.0

11.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

11.0

0.0

11.0

0.0

11.0

43.6

3.4

1.1

0.4

48.5

0.5

49.0

0.0

49.0

43.6

3.4

1.1

0.4

48.5

0.5

49.0

0.0

49.0

1.0

0.1

92.3

0.1

93.5

0.0

93.5

2,677.0

2,770.5

880.0

11.2

12.4

5.1

908.7

136.0

1,044.7

0.0

1,044.7

1,235.1

218.3

112.4

88.6

1,654.5

0.0

1,654.5

0.0

1,654.5

40.9

4.2

3.9

1.7

50.7

2.5

53.2

0.0

53.2

129.3

1.5

0.5

0.0

131.3

0.9

132.2

0.0

132.2

2,286.3

235.3

221.6

95.5

2,838.7

139.4

2,978.1

2,677.0

5,655.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2,340.9

238.7

222.7

95.9

2,898.2

139.9

3,038.1

2,677.0

5,715.1

Notes:
The data presented in this table are consistent with the Country and Regional Analyses (CRA) published by HM Treasury in
Chapter 9 of Public Expenditure Statistical Analyses (PESA) 2007. The figures were taken from the HM Treasury public spending
database in December 2006 and the regional distributions were completed in January and February 2007. Therefore the tables
may not show the latest position and are not consistent with other tables in the Departmental Report.
The functional analyses are based on the United Nations Classification of the Functions of Government (COFOG), the
international standard. The presentations of spending by function are consistent with those used in Chapter 9 of PESA 2007.
These are not the same as the strategic priorities shown elsewhere in the report.
It is not possible to forecast drawdown from the National Lottery Distribution Fund (NLDF) with absolute accuracy because,
for a variety of reasons, successful applicants draw down Lottery grants at a different rate than expected by distributing bodies.
From 2002-03 to 2004-05, drawdown from the NLDF was respectively £0.4 billion, £.03 billion and £0.1 billion lower than
forecast. In 2005-06, drawdown was about £70 million higher than expected and in 2006-07, less than £40 million lower than
forecast. These consistently smaller discrepancies show that the Department is learning to anticipate drawdown patterns in the
estimates, based on drawdown forecasts from distributors, which it puts forward.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

71

Notes

Notes on Resource and Capital Budgets
1. The following notes relate to the Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL)
and Annually Managed Expenditure (AME) tables on pages 60 – 63.
2. The table on page 60 focuses on resource DEL. It shows that, between
2001-02 and 2007-08, resource DEL will have risen by 33% in real terms,
an expected average annual real growth of 5.5%.
3. Looking at sectoral figures in this table:
growth in the spending of museums and galleries in part reflects additional
funds to compensate for free access, the first full year of which was 2002-03;
figures for Libraries (mainly the British Library) and the Museums, Libraries
and Archives Council (MLA) are affected by a re-classification in 2006-07
of certain grants from resource to capital.While the department clarifies
the extent to which these grants should be resource or capital, resource and
capital figures should be looked at together. In particular, the growth in total
spending by the MLA in recent years reflects the increase in spending on
Renaissance in the Regions, which began in 2002 and is planned to grow to
a maximum of £45 million in 2007-08;
spending on the arts will have grown by 41% in real terms between
2001-02 and 2007-08, an average annual real terms growth of 7%. Allowing
for spending on Creative Partnerships of £36 million in 2007-08, average
annual growth on all other arts spending is 5%;
growth in spending on sport and recreation is explained by the investment
in the Elite Athletes scheme during the run up to London 2012 comprising
£18.8 million in 2006-07 and £29.7 million in 2007-08. The one-off
spending in 2002-03 represents additional expenditure relating to the
Commonwealth Games;
spending on the Royal Parks Agency peaked in 2001-02 when a revaluation
in their residential estate led to a large impairment charge of £18 million.
The lower figures for 2006-07 and 2007-08 are the result of a transfer to
the Home Office for the policing of the Royal Parks;
spending on tourism peaked in 2002-03 because additional funds were
made available in that year to mitigate the impact of foot and mouth
disease on tourism; and from 1 April 2003 the English Tourist Board and
the British Tourist Authority were merged into VisitBritain; and
broadcasting and media comprises funding for S4C, which is indexed
to the retail prices index; and the UK Film Council.

72

DCMS Annual Report 2007

4. Turning to annually managed expenditure (AME) on resource (page 61):
the large figures for museums, galleries and libraries and architecture and
the historic environment in 2003-04 represents an adjustment for pension
purposes.The increase is due to the cost of transferring certain NDPBs
pensions into the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme from their by
analogy schemes.
the figures for broadcasting and media are solely disbursements of the
BBC Licence Fee; and
National Lottery sums available to distributors comprise both resource
and capital. Lottery distributors spend the income in response to external
applications and may support projects which are either capital or revenue,
or a mixture of both. The capital/resource split of expenditure by
distributors varies between individual distributors depending on the
nature of their businesses and the widely differing sectors they support.
5. Figures for the Department’s capital DEL are affected by the re-classification
of certain grants from resource to capital. That aside, the notable features in
the table on page 62 include:
the step increase in sports spending in 2006-07 is a result of the setting
up of the Football Foundation and the National Sports Foundation;
spending on the Olympics has risen sharply and been funded by transfers
from the Department for Communities and Local Government;
under administration and research, the Department’s refurbishment of
2-4 Cockspur Street. This moves nearly all staff into open plan and enables
the release of accommodation in three other buildings. Further savings
will be delivered from 2007-08 onwards from security, messengerial and
facilities management and energy reductions delivered as a result of
operating only two buildings; and
the increase in expenditure in relation to the gambling and gaming board
are associated with the costs of setting up the Gambling Commission.
6. On the capital budget within annually managed expenditure (page 63):
the museum and galleries data relate to the value of art works accepted
by HM Revenue and Customs in lieu of inheritance tax; and
broadcasting and media figures show the capital consumption of
resources by the BBC.

DCMS Annual Report 2007

73

Index

Arts 3,13,14, 35, 44

Licensing 25, 37, 47

Arts Council England 13,14, 31, 35, 44, 68 Local Government 47
BBC Charter Review 18

Museums and galleries 14, 33, 35, 40, 45

Better Regulation 47, 51

Museums, Libraries and
Archives Council 36

British Library 39
British Museum 39
Children and young people 3, 6, 14, 22,
33, 34, 40, 41, 42

Music 26, 29, 31
National Lottery 3,11, 39, 57
Obesity 40, 42, 50

Communities 3, 9,10,18, 39

Olympics and Paralympics 3, 9,10, 21, 22, 26

Correspondence 52

PE and school sport 22, 33, 34, 40, 41

Creative Economy Programme 30, 49

Public Accounts Committee 50

Creative industries 33, 37, 38

Public appointments 56

Dance 13, 22

Public Service Agreement targets 32-52

Digital switchover 17, 48

Renaissance 14, 45

Economy 3, 25, 29, 30, 37

Royal Parks 14, 23

Efficiency Programme 33, 39, 51

Senior Civil Service salaries 56

English Heritage 36, 39, 46

Sport 10,11, 21, 22, 23, 33, 34, 35, 40, 42, 43

Film 30, 49

Sport England 22, 39, 43

Gambling 26, 37, 47, 48

Strategic objectives 3

Government Art Collection 14

Sustainable development 10, 56

Historic environment 33, 36, 40, 46

Tourism 6, 9, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 47, 48, 49

Intellectual property 49

VisitBritain 26

Libraries 19

74

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Enquiries

If you have any enquiries about the
work or services of the Department
please contact General Enquiries on
020 7211 6200 or email
enquiries@culture.gov.uk
You can also email Ministers directly:
Secretary of State
Rt Hon Tessa Jowell MP
tessa.jowell@culture.gov.uk
Minister for Culture
David Lammy MP
david.lammy@culture.gov.uk
Minister for Sport
Rt Hon Richard Caborn MP
richard.caborn@culture.gov.uk
Minister for Creative
Industries and Tourism
Shaun Woodward MP
shaun.woodward@culture.gov.uk

DCMS Annual Report 2007

75

Acknowledgements

DCMS would like to thank all the
members of the public who
volunteered their time to take
part in the photoshoots.
Thanks also to the organisations
involved including:

Design: red-stone.com
Photography: Nick David
except page 10 top: Olympic
Delivery Authority
page 10 bottom: London 2012

Copies of this publication can be
provided in alternative formats.
For further information please
contact the DCMS Publicity Unit:
publications@culture.gsi.gov.uk

page 14 top: Red Stone design

Printed on Revive Silk made from
75% de-inked post-consumer waste.

Jake from Brighton and
Hove City Libraries

page 14 bottom: © Queen’s Printer
and Controller of HMSO, 2007.
UK Government Art Collection

Printed in the UK for The Stationery
Office on behalf of the Controller of
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.

Sophie from Britten Sinfonia

page 18: Red Stone design

ID5551088 05/07

Mike from Broad Street BID

page 22 top:Youth Sport Trust

James from GB Wheelchair
Rugby Association

page 22 bottom: Sport England

David from Leaps and Bounds
Becca from LSO Discovery

page 30 top: Michael Cross © Café
Gallery Projects London

Gareth and the LSO St Luke’s
Community Choir

page 30 bottom: Encounters Short
Film Festival

Angela and Georgina from
Birmingham Royal Ballet

page 26 top: Visit Britain

Nina and Victoria from mima
Karen, Emily and Jean-Pierre
from Oxford Castle
Jason and Melinda from the
Royal Parks Agency
Cara from RNIB
Volunteer Development
Caroline and Claire from Sheffield
Galleries and Museums Trust
James from Talented Athlete
Scholarship Scheme

76

DCMS Annual Report 2007

Published by TSO
(The Stationery Office)
and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, telephone, fax and email
TSO
PO Box 29
Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/general
enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary
Hotline Lo-call: 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701

TSO Shops
123 Kingsway
London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393
Fax 020 7242 6394
16 Arthur Street
Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451
Fax 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road
Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566
Fax 0870 606 5588
TSO@Blackwell
and other Accredited Agents
ISBN 978-0-10-171042-8

As the Department for Culture,
Media and Sport, we are responsible
for Government policy on, or the
management of: Architecture,
Archives, Arts, Broadcasting, Creative
industries, Export licensing of
cultural goods, Film, Gambling,
Government Art Collection, Historic
buildings and sites, Humanitarian
assistance, Libraries, Licensing,
Museums and galleries, Music
industry, National Lottery, Olympic
Games and Paralympic Games 2012,
Press freedom and regulation,
Remembrance Day Ceremony at the
Cenotaph, Royal Parks Agency,
Sport, Tourism.

2-4 Cockspur Street
London SW1Y 5DH
www.culture.gov.uk
May 2007

