DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the Science and
Technology Select Committee Report on Human
Enhancement Technologies
Session 2006-07

Presented to Parliament by
the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
23 April 2007

Cm 7088

£5.00

© Crown Copyright 2007
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

Government response to the Science and Technology Select
Committee Report on Human Enhancement Technologies
Session 2006-07
The Science and Technology Select Committee’s report on Human Enhancement
Technologies comes at a time when there are significant developments taking place to
strengthen the international community’s fight against doping in sport.
First, the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) is in the process of conducting an
international consultation on the World Anti-Doping Code (the “Code”), which is widely
recognised as the single greatest step in the international fight to eradicate doping through
the harmonisation of anti-doping rules across all countries and all sports. The Department
and UK Sport are playing an active role in this review, which will culminate in the World
Conference on Doping in Sport in Madrid in November.
Second, the UK has recently ratified the UNESCO Convention, the first legally binding
international framework setting out the responsibilities of Governments in fighting doping
in sport. This Convention came into force on 1 February this year, and officials from the
Department have been working with colleagues across Government to look at what more
can be done to meet our responsibilities.
In addition, London will host the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, the world’s
greatest sporting festival. Making sure that the Games are drug free is vital to the integrity
of the Olympic and Paralympic movements, and to all the athletes who will come to
London to compete.
The Committee’s report is therefore a contribution to the Government’s efforts to stay as
close to the cheats as possible. While the Government does not accept all of the
Committee’s recommendations, particularly where there is a lack of supporting evidence,
in a limited way the report will help the Government and UK Sport engage more
effectively in the international community’s efforts to fight doping in sport, and strengthen
our already very successful national anti-doping programme.
1. We believe that ethics are an important consideration in the fight against doping
and are concerned that limited attempts are being made to address this issue. We
recommend that UK Sport establish a Committee to examine the ethical aspects of
doping in sport and advise WADA on possible changes to the consideration of ethical
issues within its operations. We also believe that UK Sport and WADA should
consider the case for funding research into the ethics of doping. (Paragraph 46)
Government Response
The Committee’s view that ethics are an important consideration accords with the view of
Government and UK Sport, the UK’s National Anti-Doping Organisation (NADO), both
with regard to anti-doping and more widely across sport.
Government and UK Sport take the issue of ethically fair and drug-free sport very
seriously, demonstrated by the fact that one of UK Sport’s strategic priorities is ‘World
Class Standards’. Under this priority, UK Sport aims to promote the highest standards of
sporting conduct and fair play, both on and off the field.

1

To illustrate, last year UK Sport decided to establish a Science Research Steering Group
(RSG) and a Social and Ethics RSG. The latter would aim to enhance our understanding
of the attitudes and values that influence and determine the behaviour of elite and
development level athletes, athlete support personnel and sporting officials in regards to
doping in sport. Outcomes from these will assist with the development of the UK’s antidoping programme and policies, and will contribute to more effective doping prevention
strategies.
From 2001 to 04 UK Sport implemented its Sporting Conduct Initiative which was
primarily concerned with developing a shared view of the kind of behaviour that is
acceptable and unacceptable in different sports, and with building a consensus about how,
in terms of conduct, these sports ought to be officiated, played, administered, coached and
managed.
Following on from this work, UK Sport’s 100% ME Education programme was established
in 2005, not only to promote the rules and regulations of anti-doping, but to communicate
the broader philosophy of personal responsibility, values, choice and fairness in sport.
UK Sport’s major anti-doping survey in 2005 set useful benchmarks for better
understanding the attitudes and values athletes possess in regards to doping in sport. To
complement this research on elite level athletes, and in order to foster a generation of
sportsmen and women who believe they can succeed in sport without the use of prohibited
substances and methods, in 2006 UK Sport embarked on a six year programme of social
science research with the aim of identifying when and why the attitudes and values of
talented athletes between the ages of 12 and 21 may alter in regards to anti-doping as they
move through UK Sport’s World Class Pathway Programme.
Through this research UK Sport has begun tracking the experiences of talented athletes,
and results of the 2006 questionnaire will be available in the summer of 2007. This will be
followed by qualitative interviews with 100 panellists later this year.
Furthermore, UK Sport currently consults UK experts on ethical issues arising from the
World Anti-Doping Code. An example of this is UK Sport’s consultation on the WADC
Prohibited List 2006 and in response to the debate on hypoxic conditions as a prohibited
method, where advice was sought from UK scientists and ethicists before submitting a
response to WADA, the general principle of which was accepted. UK Sport will continue
to liaise with the scientists and ethicists who have extensive experience in high
performance sport.
2. We recommend that UK Sport commission research into the real incidence of
doping both in general and in particular sports in order that the magnitude of the
problem may be understood and the means of tackling it may be better defined.
(Paragraph 50)
Government Response
While Government recognises the Committee’s reason for this recommendation, it is
extremely difficult in practice to gain an accurate measurement of the ‘real incidences of
doping’ through research. Indeed, UK Sport advises that it does not know of any
recognised research methodology that has achieved this degree of accuracy.

2

Socially sensitive issues, such as drug misuse and doping, are often under-reported due to
the athlete’s unwillingness to provide information about themselves that might reveal
unacceptable behaviour, even where responses are anonymous. Response errors are
expected in research when using direct interview techniques and questionnaires, which has
led UK Sport to work with social researchers to identify effective research methodology
aimed at minimising such errors.
In light of this, Government believes that UK Sport’s Intelligence testing model and plans
to draw on research, as set out in the response to Recommendation 1, is the most effective
way to come to an understanding about ‘real incidences of doping’.
3. We are concerned at the ease by which banned, and potentially dangerous,
substances can be obtained for use by athletes and we recommend that the
Government review regulation in this area. (Paragraph 52)
Government Response.
The Government shares the Committee’s concerns about access to potentially dangerous
substances via the internet. We are particularly concerned about access to prohibited
substances that are provided via websites operating outside of the UK’s jurisdiction.
Within UK Government’s jurisdiction, the legislative and regulatory framework is
principally provided by the Medicines Act 1968 and the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. The
purpose of these two statutes is to control the availability of human medicines and drugs
that are dangerous or otherwise harmful respectively, including availability via the
Internet.
The Medicines Act and supporting regulations set out the legislative controls with relation
to medicinal products for human use and provide that it is unlawful for such products to
be marketed, manufactured, distributed and sold or supplied in the UK except in
accordance with the appropriate licences and exemptions.
Enforcement under the Medicines Act is carried out by the Enforcement and Intelligence
Group at the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Its
Investigation Officers are authorised by Health Ministers, and this authority confers
rights of entry, power to inspect and powers of seizure.
As part of its role, the MHRA Intelligence Unit monitors medicines being offered for sale
on the Internet, and has the power to take enforcement action where the website is based
in the UK. Furthermore, the Intelligence Unit participates in a network of medicines
regulators within the EU and elsewhere, and is able to inform these regulators of sites
offering medicines which fall within their, but outside the UK’s, jurisdiction.
The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 establishes a comprehensive range of criminal offences for
the unauthorised (and therefore unlawful) possession, possession with intent to supply,
offer to supply, supply, import and exportation and production of substances that are
controlled under the Act. These offences apply irrespective of the means by which the
controlled substances are made available to the user, for example through a face to face
transaction, or via the internet.
HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) is the agency which has responsibility for
enforcement of the legislation with regards the importation of controlled substances.
HMRC uses intelligence and modern detection techniques to identify packages which may
contain prohibited drugs, and, where this is found to be the case, has the powers to seize
these substances and prosecute offenders.
3

The Government is committed to reducing the harm caused by drug misuse throughout the
UK. The Home Office is currently leading the Government’s review of its 10 year National
Drug Strategy, and intends to launch the new strategy at the end of this year. In doing so,
Ministers are calling for active engagement across Government and beyond.
Whilst the future Strategy must continue to focus on the most dangerous drugs and the
most damaged communities, DCMS intends to make representations that the Strategy
takes into account the availability and misuse of drugs in sport.
DCMS believes that, rather than seeking a review of regulations, it is more appropriate
that officials continue their work with the MHRA, Home Office and law enforcement
agencies to investigate what more can be achieved through augmenting enforcement under
the current legislative framework.
Furthermore, legal advisers to DCMS are in the process of evaluating the extent to which
substances on the WADA 2007 Prohibited List are subject to UK legislation, in particular
the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. DCMS and the Home Office have agreed to work together
to consider the case for control of any substances which currently fall outside of 1971 Act.
Finally, DCMS officials are in contact with the Secretariat to the Advisory Council on the
Misuse of Drugs (ACMD) about any future role the Council might have with the issue of
doping in sport.
4. We do not believe that it is in the best interest of the athlete for WADA to remove
its accreditation from laboratories testing commercial supplements for use in sport.
We recommend that the Minister for Sport maintain pressure on WADA to secure the
continuing accreditation of laboratories which also test commercial supplements. In
addition, we recommend UK Sport take the lead in working with relevant bodies to
put in place a certification system for supplements used in sport to regulate against
contamination of food supplements and provide assurance to athletes on the purity of
what they are taking. (Paragraph 57)
Government Response
The Government fully supports this recommendation, and both DCMS and UK Sport will
continue to press WADA on this matter, principally through the Code review process.
UK Sport has consulted widely with key stakeholders to build support in favour of WADA
accredited laboratories having the ability to provide supplement testing services for elite
sport. UK Sport believes there must be clear distinctions made between urine sample
analysis and supplement testing services, but utilising the skills and resources of WADA
accredited laboratories should be an available option.
Since 2001, UK Sport has worked to provide athletes with education, information and
support relating to supplements and has created a number of resources to assist athletes in
making safe and responsible choices about their health and performance. These education
resources are underpinned by the supplements position statement produced in 2002 in
collaboration with the British Olympic Association (BOA), British Paralympic Association
(BPA) and the Home Country Sports Councils. This statement was revised in 2006
following an Open Day for National Governing Bodies.
Furthermore, UK Sport established a supplements working group in 2005, which
continues to meet to consider how to provide further support to athletes in this area.

4

It is worth noting that UK Sport is one of the few National Anti-Doping Organisations that
takes a firm stance on this matter and that it will continue to do so to protect the right of
all athletes in the UK to make responsible and informed choices about supplements in
sport.
5. We recommend that UK Sport consult upon and review its education material
aimed at general practitioners and other medics on the issues faced by athletes,
providing further education if this is deemed necessary to clarify WADA prohibited
substances and the routes via which such substances may be given. (Paragraph 58)
Government Response
Government welcomes this recommendation, and UK Sport will endeavour in the next
year to build on the information and education material available to general medical
personnel. That said, it should be noted that considerable services and resources are
currently available to general medical personnel regarding anti-doping.
UK Sport’s Drug Information Database™ (DID) is a global drug information service
available online without subscription. The DID provides easily accessible and accurate
responses to queries about the status in sport of licensed pharmaceutical and over-thecounter medicinal products available in the UK and Canada, and contains thousands of
generic compounds available throughout the world. UK Sport was the first National AntiDoping Organisation to provide an online drug information service, which is being used
globally by athletes, international federations and anti-doping organisations.
In addition, UK Sport provides updates to the British National Formulary, a reputable
medical publication which includes information on anti-doping using a copy of UK Sport’s
advice card of permitted and prohibited substances, Therapeutic Use Exemptions (TUEs)
and supplements.
UK Sport annually delivers anti-doping training to all practitioners selected for UK Sport’s
Fast track Practitioner programme for Sports Science and Sport Medicine practitioners and
the Sports Medicine Diploma at Bath University. Through 2007 - 08 it is intended to
extend these opportunities to other universities and colleges in the field of sports science,
sports medicine and coaching.
6. We urge DCMS and UK Sport to press WADA for clear reasoning to be given for
each substance and method included on the Prohibited List and for its decisions in
cases where substances and methods are examined but not banned. As a general rule,
we should like to see increased attention paid by WADA to the science behind
substances and methods considered for inclusion in the List. (Paragraph 63)
Government Response
Government fully agrees with the Committee’s concerns at the lack of transparency in how
the WADA List Committee reaches its decisions.
This view was communicated to WADA in the UK’s second Code review submission dated
30 March. In his foreword to this submission, the Minister for Sport said that “…it is
important that greater clarity is achieved through WADA’s publication of the deliberations
of the List Committee, showing that resultant decisions are based on sound scientific
evidence. Transparency of this process is key for the worldwide credibility of the List.”
Government and UK Sport will continue to press WADA, when appropriate, on this issue.

5

7. We are concerned at the approach taken by the Government to the use of
recreational drugs in sport where they may be performance-enhancing and against
the spirit of sport, and we urge the Government to conduct further research to
ascertain the possible performance-enhancing capacity of social drugs in sport.
(Paragraph 65)
Government Response
In its previous recommendation, the Committee called for WADA to give greater weight
to scientific evidence when considering whether or not a substance or method should be
included on the Prohibited List.
This accords with Government’s view on all of the substances on the List, whether they are
classed as ‘recreational’ or not. We are entirely clear that where a substance is scientifically
proven to enhance performance, it should be included on the List.
The Committee will be aware that for any substance or method to be considered for
inclusion on the List, it must meet two of the three criteria set out by WADA. These are:
performance enhancing; damaging to the health of the athlete; and against the spirit of
sport.
As these criteria are given equal weighting there are substances on the List that could
potentially damage the health of the athlete and are viewed to contravene the spirit of sport.
However, it is entirely possible that, according to all available science, these substances
have no performance enhancing effect whatsoever.
Government’s view is that any substance or method on the List should, as a minimum, meet
the criteria of performance enhancing and further that, in accordance with the Committee’s
previous recommendation, this should be scientifically proven. It undermines the
credibility of the List where a substance or method’s performance enhancing ability is
simply a matter of conjecture.
With regards the Committee’s assertion that Government should carry out research on the
performance enhancing capacity of recreational drugs, we have set out in our response to
Recommendations 23 and 24 the reasons for our belief that WADA is the organisation best
placed to carry out any such research.
8. We recommend that UK Sport press WADA for abolition of the abbreviated TUE
system, and that UK Sport ensure that all TUEs in the UK are awarded on the basis
of sufficient evidence that an athlete requires the medication for which the exemption
has been awarded. (Paragraph 68)
Government Response
While Government acknowledges the Committee’s concerns regarding the perceived flaws
with WADA’s Abbreviated Therapeutic Use Exemptions (ATUE) system, UK Sport’s
Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) Committee works to the highest standards of integrity
in compliance with the International Standard for TUEs, and ensures that a TUE is never
approved unless sufficient evidence is provided. In addition, given the potential for abuse
of the ATUE system, UK Sport uses the TUE Committee to review any ATUE applications
that highlight concerns.

6

UK Sport has recommended strongly to WADA that it reviews and improves the system
for monitoring substances and methods that currently require an ATUE, and it will
continue to do so. However, we do not agree that such a system should be abolished as the
Therapeutic Use Exemption system is an important mechanism for drug-free athletes to
seek permission to legitimately use prohibited substances and methods for a medical
condition.
9. We recommend that UK Sport further develop its research programme into the
science behind doping and that it apply understanding of the effects and
pharmacokinetics of banned substances to its testing programme to help further
identify optimum testing time-points for doping in sport. (Paragraph 69)
Government Response
Government believes that it is WADA which is best placed to take the lead on such
research. WADA is uniquely placed to co-ordinate research internationally, and to share
the outcomes and findings. We do not believe that best return on investment into research
can be achieved by countries acting unilaterally. Furthermore, UK Sport’s primary role is
that of a National Anti-Doping Organisation, not a research institution.
However, in developing its testing programme, UK Sport has identified the need to draw
on existing research, and so is in the process of setting up a Research Steering Group to
assist in identifying possible areas for collaboration and development as set out in our
response to Recommendation 1.
UK Sport has also expressed support for the submission of a research project by the
Glasgow consortium headed by Dr Yannis Pitsiladis to investigate genetic, physiologic and
environmental factors related to doping, and has been supportive of the work of
Southampton University investigating Human Growth Hormone headed by Professor Peter
Sonksen and Dr Richard Holt.
10. We recommend that UK Sport work with WADA to help further develop
WADA’s testing regime and increase the chance of catching athletes who are guilty of
doping. (Paragraph 71)
Government Response
Government is proud of the strong relationship UK Sport has formed with WADA,
NADOs and other international partners, and the joint work it has undertaken in order to
improve the testing programmes of others around the world. UK Sport will continue to do
so as its Intelligence testing model develops, and Government welcomes the Committee’s
endorsement of this model in the report.
To illustrate, in April UK Sport is to host the second WADA Legal Symposium, aimed at
better coordinating successful prosecution of athletes found to have contravened the World
Anti-Doping Code.
UK Sport will be the first NADO to fully utilise all aspects of WADA online clearing
house, the Anti-Doping Administration and Management System (ADAMS),
demonstrating a significant commitment to WADA and its endeavours at producing a
harmonized approach to testing through the promotion of sharing information between
countries and International Federations.

7

UK Sport was recently invited by WADA to be a member of a working group charged with
redrafting the International Standard for Testing. The working group was limited to those
organisations which have comprehensive and established Out-of-Competition testing
programmes and included USADA, the IAAF (Athletics International Federation) and FIS
(Skiing International Federation). UK Sport’s current Athlete Whereabouts model was
highlighted as an example of best practice, and the new draft currently under review
reflects the experience and knowledge of UK Sport staff in developing the national system.
Furthermore, UK Sport has reciprocal testing arrangements with a number of developed
NADOs worldwide. UK Sport also uses Association of National Anti-Doping
Association’s (ANADO) Anti-Doping Services (ADS) to test UK athletes when abroad and
similarly undertakes testing on international athletes when in the UK at the request of
ANADO-ADS or WADA. Such relationships enhance the capacity to reach those athletes
who compete, train or live abroad and who otherwise could fall off the testing ‘radar’, as
well as facilitating the sharing of best practice as called for by the Committee.
Finally, UK Sport recognises the Committee’s view that in order for anti-doping efforts to
be fully effective, it is fundamental that other countries build the capacity to operate
effective systems of detection, deterrence and prevention. In September 2006 UK Sport
was asked by WADA to assist in training Doping Control Officers in the Gulf Coast
Countries and Yemen Regional Anti-Doping Organisation (RADO). As a consequence,
WADA has further requested that UK Sport anti-doping staff train additional Doping
Control Officers and tutors in Saudi Arabia in May 2007.
11. Whilst we accept that most testing is satisfactorily carried out through urine, we
are of the view that increased research may be needed to determine the most
appropriate testing route for different prohibited substances and we urge the
Government to consider supporting studies of this nature. In the meantime, we urge
UK Sport to increase its programme for testing blood samples since this may facilitate
more detailed testing for prohibited substances, either in the present or future.
(Paragraph 72)
Government Response
Government welcomes the Committee’s acknowledgement that an effective anti-doping
programme should incorporate both urine and blood testing, as this endorses the approach
being developed by UK Sport.
Urine is still widely considered the most effective and consistent indicator of detecting
most substances in an athlete’s body. However, recognising the need to keep abreast of
current thinking UK Sport invited a number of internationally recognised experts in blood
testing to a meeting in November 2006.
Drawing on the conclusions from this meeting UK Sport has increased the emphasis on
blood testing for the coming testing year. UK Sport is equipped with the necessary Blood
Collection Officers, equipment and documentation to conduct both anti-doping blood
testing and blood screening programmes on behalf of International Federations, an
example of which was UK Sport’s integral involvement in blood screening at the recent
2007 European Indoor Athletics Championship.
12. We recommend that UK Sport and WADA increase storing of data and samples
to allow re-evaluation and analysis of test samples once more sophisticated detection
methodologies have been developed. (Paragraph 75)

8

Government Response
Guidance on the storing of samples is a matter specifically for WADA and for its
accredited laboratories. The current World Anti-Doping Code International Standard for
Laboratories requires laboratories to store samples for a minimum of three months and
both WADA accredited laboratories in the UK meet this WADA requirement.
As part of the review of the Code and the International Standards, the proposal to lengthen
this time period, and the subsequent practical and financial implications, are being
considered.
13. We urge UK Sport to consider the value of implementing a policy in which all
UK athletes would be obliged to compete internationally in the 12 months prior to the
2012 Olympics in order to be eligible for participation in the games, with exemption
given where appropriate, for example in cases of serious and proven injury.
(Paragraph 76)
Government Response
UK Sport is not aware of any scenario where an athlete would compete for Team GB in the
Olympic Games without having competed internationally during the preceding year. It is
incredibly rare for performers in able bodied sport to appear internationally for the first
time at major events, although it is not unheard of in Paralympic sports.
Furthermore, athletes wish to gain as much international experience as possible in the run
up to a major event, as well as being required to qualify through competing at international
events. Therefore we do not believe that this Recommendation is required.
14. We recommend DCMS evaluate whether the resources allocated to anti-doping
within its own department are sufficient, and whether they will be so by 2012.
Government Response
DCMS regularly reviews and evaluates its allocation of resources through its routine
business planning cycles, and will continue to do so in the run up to 2012.
There is also a further requirement on the Department to evaluate resource allocations
continuously as part of its three year Comprehensive Spending Review agreement with the
Treasury.
The Department is currently embarking on a transformation programme in response to the
DCMS Capability Review, published on 27 March 2007. This will include consideration
of the distribution of resources within the Department.
Finally, through its Funding Agreement with UK Sport, DCMS also reviews and monitors
the resources allocated to UK Sport, which is responsible for delivering the UK’s antidoping programme.
15. We recommend that, rather than arrogate to itself a world-wide leading position,
UK Sport operate a continuous review process to ensure current and future success
of the UK anti-doping programme. This review process should include monitoring
whether the rules are understood and applied consistently across all sports in the UK.
(Paragraph 80)

9

Government Response
Government strongly refutes the suggestion that UK Sport has arrogated itself a world
leading position. Indeed, during the oral evidence sessions for this inquiry, the Committee
heard from a number of witnesses that UK Sport has achieved international recognition as
a world leading Anti-Doping Organisation.
Moreover, UK Sport disputes the implication that it does not already have a continuous
review process in place. UK Sport is audited and scrutinised regularly and rigorously
through the British Standards Institute, from which it has received ISO Certification
annually since 1997, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (DTT), the recently established
Independent Scrutiny Panel, WADA, the Council of Europe and DCMS.
Furthermore, UK Sport’s business standard and performance requirement is to ensure that
regular internal audits of procedures are undertaken. All feedback is considered and action
is taken to ensure a world class programme is maintained and continuously improved.
The UK is a world leader in anti-doping. UK Sport has one of the most creative and
effective education programmes, one of the largest testing programmes, will be one of the
first NADOs to fully utilise the functionality of ADAMS and has one of the world’s most
advanced Athlete Whereabouts Programmes.
The competency of UK Sport is reflected by the representation of staff on various
International Committees and Working Groups established by WADA, the Council of
Europe, the Association of National Anti-Doping Organisations (ANADO) and through
representation in formal capacity at major events, including the Olympic and Paralympic
Games.
As the UK’s NADO, one of UK Sport’s key roles is to support and monitor compliance
with the World Anti-Doping Code. This has been successfully achieved through the
development of the UK Sport Model Rules and the establishment of an NGB Agreement
for all sports on the testing programme. Indeed, UK Sport recently appealed successfully
against a sanction imposed by a National Governing Body (NGB) which it did not deem
compliant.
16. We recommend that UK Sport work with schools to develop an effective
mechanism for educating about the harm which doping in sport can cause.
(Paragraph 82)
Government Response
Government accepts that the school system is a valuable route through which anti-doping
education can be provided, and UK Sport has run a number of initiatives for schools.
However, while education for schools is an important aspect of any anti-doping education
programme, the main target audience is athletes and their support personnel at a world
class development and performance level.
In 2004 UK Sport developed three modules for use in schools covering the following three
topics; ‘History, Rules and Ethics’, ‘Rules and Regulations’ and ‘Drugs and their effects
and risks’. These lesson plans and activities are available on the 100% ME website, and
were written to support learning within various areas of the National Curriculum.

10

Through the 100% ME Outreach programme, UK Sport attended ten events in 2006, where
around 8,000 school-age athletes were educated about drug-free sport and the value of
competing fairly. Furthermore, over the next year the Outreach Programme will be
primarily aimed at developing athletes and school-age competitors.
Through the 100% ME Accreditation Programme, UK Sport has delivered a number of
workshops to school students and school-age competitors. In 2006 UK Sport began
discussions with the British Athletes Commission with the aim of formalising a process
whereby 100% ME Ambassadors can deliver drug-free sport workshops. This will be
pursued over the next year.
Also in 2006 UK Sport, in partnership with the Youth Sport Trust, began drafting an
education resource for use in schools. This resource will be based on the British Athletes
Commission’s document ‘6-keys to Success’ and will be available for teachers via the
100% ME website.
17. We urge UK Sport and DCMS to liaise formally with ASADA and USADA in
order to determine best practice in testing, investigation and prosecution of doping
offences. We recommend that a separate body be established to undertake these roles
in the UK, independent of UK Sport and the national governing bodies of individual
sports. (Paragraph 88)
Government Response
UK Sport and DCMS are already actively involved in a number of International networks
which facilitate sharing best practice.
Government is signatory to the International Anti-Doping Arrangement (IADA), which
was established with the express aim of learning from the best practices being
implemented around the world in precisely the sorts of areas the Committee highlights in
its report. The other IADA signatories are Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa and Sweden.
Additionally, UK Sport is a member of the Association of National Anti-Doping
Organisations (ANADO), one of whose objectives is to facilitate the exchange of
information, experience and learning between its members. ANADO currently has 45
members, including ASADA and USADA.
UK Sport also attended the WADA Legal Symposium, hosted by USADA in Colorado
Springs, in November 2006. The aim of this Symposium was to discuss how sport and
governments can best co-operate and co-ordinate activities, notably in the sharing of
information. A number of the areas discussed were based around the models being used by
ASADA and USADA, who were represented.
UK Sport hosted the next Symposium on 16-17 April, and this was attended by officials
from DCMS and HMRC.
The Committee raised the issue of an independent anti-doping agency with the Minister
for Sport when he appeared before them on 12 December 2006. At this time the Minister
reminded the Committee of the independent reviews carried out on the UK Sport antidoping function in 2004, which found no evidence to support the assertion of a conflict of
interest. He further said that he had full confidence in UK Sport as the UK’s NADO, and
while he recognised that there was the perception of a conflict in the minds of some
individuals, he was not prepared to take action on this until supporting evidence was
produced.
11

Government strongly believes that no such evidence has been provided during the course
of this inquiry. Furthermore, the Independent Scrutiny Panel set up in 2005 to consider
the question of a conflict of interest at UK Sport, published its first annual report on
15 December 2006. The report did not identify any conflicts of interest.
DCMS and UK Sport do, however, continually review the structure and remit of UK Sport
as the UK’s National Anti-Doping Organisation, and will continue to do so in the run up
to London 2012. This will include continuing to seek to learn lessons from best practice
internationally and to look at how best these can be used within the UK.
18. We urge the Government to initiate a review of the experience of countries which
have put in place laws criminalising doping in sport. (Paragraph 91)
Government Response
Through our involvement in a range of international anti-doping forums, such as the
Council of Europe’s Coordination Forum, Government keeps abreast of anti-doping
programmes and approaches in other countries. We are aware, for example, of WADA’s
scheme to publicise international approaches to anti-doping, including the wide-ranging
legislation in place.
Additionally, as part of its EU Presidency, Germany has recently conducted a survey to
look at the legislation adopted by EU Member States, and is currently considering how to
take forward findings from the survey.
We are aware that of those governments which have taken the legislative approach, for a
large number the legislation is still in its infancy and lessons are being learned. By way of
illustration, the Spanish model has recently attracted criticism from an International
Federation because of the delays it has faced in progressing sanctions against athletes,
because of obligations imposed under the national legislation.
Government does, however, keep the UK’s approach under regular review and remains
receptive to learning from differing international approaches.
19. We urge UK Sport to recommend to WADA that a minimum four year ban is
applied in all incidences of proven doping. (Paragraph 92)
Government Response
During the consultation process for the 2003 World Anti-Doping Code, there was extensive
discussion on the proportionality and effectiveness of a four year sanction for athletes
found to have committed an anti-doping rule violation. As the Committee is aware, the
debate culminated in a two year sanction for a first offence and then a lifetime ban for a
second.
The issue of sanctions has been revisited in the latest draft of the Code, following the first
phase of consultation in the Code review. In this latest draft provision has been enhanced
to allow for an increase in the first sanction to four years in ‘aggravated circumstances’
such as the athlete being involved in a wider doping scandal, or possessing multiple
prohibited substances.

12

Government welcomes this amendment to the Code. Indeed, UK Sport has contributed to
the current movement towards a four year sanction for aggravated circumstances, while
acknowledging that in order for harmonisation to be truly effective, it must be possible for
any sanction to be applied consistently across all sports.
20. We urge UK Sport to consider a mechanism by which athletes would be liable
for repayment of all financial gains, perhaps from the point of the last ‘clean’ test they
had given. (Paragraph 93)
Government Response
Legal advisers have counselled that in any judicial process, proof of an offence can only
be established with evidence which determines when the offence was first committed. As
several months may exist between a negative test and an anti-doping rule violation, it
would not be legally justifiable to attempt to enforce the repayment of financial gain
received by an athlete during this period.
Within the current UK Sport Athlete Personal Awards, the terms and conditions make it
clear that all financial payments will be suspended on notification of a case to answer of
an anti-doping rule violation, pending final determination of the case. The funding awards
also stipulate that UK Sport reserves the right to reclaim any of the financial instalments
of the award made to the athlete during the period of the breach.
In addition to this, some International Federations make it clear that any financial gain
from an event will be returned to the appropriate body and forms part of the sanction
imposed on the athlete. UK Sport has no jurisdiction to demand repayment of any financial
gain beyond that which is distributed through the World Class Performance Programme.
The degree to which such financial gains must be repaid depends entirely on the
jurisdiction of the relevant authority and any existing contract that the athlete has with an
event organiser.
21. We recommend that UK Sport and sporting bodies consider making it a
requirement that athletes should disclose sources of doping before they are allowed to
return to competitive sport. (Paragraph 94)
Government Response
While Government acknowledges the intention behind this recommendation, UK Sport
has advised that such a requirement would be unenforceable, particularly as many athletes
deny knowing how the substance found its way into their system. However, we welcome
the improved provisions within the latest draft of the Code which enable an athlete to
reduce their sanction if they assist in identifying sources of doping.
22. We urge the Government to clarify the position regarding the jurisdiction of the
Court of Arbitration for Sport for arbitration and mediation of disputes in doping
cases which may occur prior to and during the London 2012 Olympics and to take
any steps necessary to ensure that appropriate jurisdiction is established. (Paragraph
96)
During the period of the Games, jurisdiction over anti-doping at the Games sits with the
London Organising Committee for the Olympic Games (LOCOG). LOCOG will establish
the appeal process and the sanction process which will be applicable during this time, and
will work with the Court of Arbitration for Sport in doing so.

13

Government was pleased that Matthieu Reeb, the Court of Arbitration for Sport’s (CAS)
Secretary General, confirmed that CAS already has in place a set of procedural rules
which clearly set out its jurisdiction with regards the Olympic Games, and which were
used for the Torino Games in 2006.
These rules are laid out in the CAS document ‘Arbitration Rules for the Olympic Games’
and cover the establishment of an ad-hoc Division of CAS which has jurisdiction to deal
with all disputes, including those in doping cases, arising in the ten days prior to the
Opening Ceremony and during the Games.
23. We recommend that the Government establish effective means of monitoring
and evaluating potential areas of threat from doping prior to the London 2012
Olympics. We recommend that this responsibility be given to the new organisation in
charge of testing, investigation and prosecution of doping offences, distinct from UK
Sport, as recommended earlier in this Report. (Paragraph 98)
Government Response
Government believes that WADA is best placed to monitor and evaluate potential areas of
threat in doping, given WADA’s unique position internationally as the key coordinating
body in the fight against doping. This position allows WADA access to leading and cutting
edge anti-doping research.
For example, since 2001 WADA's Medical and Research Committee (MRC) has funded a
total of 117 research projects. This research has been integral to the development of
research into future threats.
In 2007 the MRC has invited tenders for, and is funding research in, the five key areas of:
●

Compounds and/or methods enhancing oxygen delivery

●

Non-steroidal compounds or methods enhancing growth

●

Projects relating to the Prohibited List: classic methodologies

●

Projects relating to Prohibited List: novel methodologies

●

Identification and/or detection of substances with suspected doping potential

This research includes work on the detection of ‘novel’ and newly emerging doping threats
and, by virtue of its global reach, WADA is able to draw from leading international
research bodies, including those in the UK.
For example, UK Sport is working closely with researchers at the University of
Southampton who are looking at methods for the detection of abuse of Human Growth
Hormone. Furthermore, there are two studies into gene doping technologies currently
being carried out at Nottingham Trent University and at the Royal Free and University
College Medical School.
Government believes that while it is reasonable to expect some horizon scanning to be
carried out by UK Sport, as evidenced by the establishment of its Research Steering
Groups, it is also right to expect UK Sport to direct its limited resources where these can
have best effect. To this end, it is appropriate that UK Sport has direct access to those
networks that can carry out horizon scanning on its behalf, both in the UK and abroad,
principally through WADA.

14

However Government does acknowledge the Committee’s call for greater crossgovernment working between HMRC and DCMS in identifying those substances which
are being imported into the UK and which may be used to enhance performance illegally.
Indeed, officials from DCMS are working with colleagues in HMRC to establish what
information and intelligence can be shared with regards to substances being imported. In
addition, HMRC is part of the cross-government Inter Departmental Group which
considers departmental planning for the 2012 Games and its legacy.
24. We recommend that DCMS and UK Sport develop a funding stream to support
research into potentially prohibited substances and methods for their detection. We
recommend that funds be made available for this work well in advance of the London
2012 Olympics. (Paragraph 103)
Government Response
As outlined in the response to Recommendation 23, Government believes that it is WADA
which is best placed to take the lead on such research. It is uniquely placed to set the
research priorities, invite bids from the best research institutions around the world and,
importantly, to make public the results. We do not believe that the best return on investment
into research is achieved by countries acting unilaterally.
Furthermore, the Government makes annual contributions to WADA’s running costs, of
which WADA contributes approximately 20% to funding research.
Since 2002, the UK has contributed US$3,637,825 to WADA which, at current exchange
rates, equates to almost £2 million.
In 2006 WADA (drawing from the contributions from Public Authorities and the Olympic
Movement) approved US$6.3 million for the 2007 research programme. This brings the
Agency’s total commitment in research funding to more than US$31 million.
25. We recommend that the UK pilot the development of a doping passport and that
government funds be made available for development of this scheme. To support this,
we recommend that funding be given for research into normal physiology and
changes in physiological characteristics after doping with illegal substances.
(Paragraph 105)
Government Response
The type of ‘doping passport’ scheme the Committee recommends is currently being
piloted by a number of sports’ International Federations (IFs). UK Sport is watching with
interest the development of these programmes, the early lessons being learned and the
potential future applications these may have.
Furthermore, UK Sport is continuing to investigate active mechanisms of capturing
relevant data from athletes, such as blood profiling and use of the ADAMS database, while
acknowledging the impact on athletes and the significant resources required.
However, as has been mentioned in our response to Recommendations 23 and 24,
Government believes that WADA should take the lead in co-ordinating anti-doping
research such as that suggested by the Committee.

15

The Committee should be made aware, however, that there are accepted international
protocols, namely the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki (Ethical
Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects) first accepted in 1964, which
ensures that the health of humans involved in research is protected and thereby restricts the
scope of research to, for example, test doping substances on humans to assess changes to
their physiological characteristics. This is supported by the World Anti-Doping Code
which states that all research ‘shall comply with internationally recognised practices’.
26. We recommend that UK Sport and DCMS urgently consult on requirements for
scale-up of testing facilities, personnel and protocol during the London 2012
Olympics and that Government funding for meeting such requirements be made
available. This will clearly require close working with LOCOG and to facilitate this,
we urge the Government to provide a clear statement on the responsibilities and remit
of LOCOG and UK Sport regarding the London 2012 testing programme.
(Paragraph 109)
DCMS and UK Sport fully anticipate consulting on the requirements for scaling-up testing
facilities, personnel and protocol for the 2012 Games at the appropriate time.
As the Committee is aware, the responsibility for testing during Games-time falls to
LOCOG, under delegation from the International Olympic Committee.
In February LOCOG appointed its Chief Medical Officer (CMO) with overall
responsibility for the anti-doping programme for the 2012 Games. In light of this
appointment, LOCOG has begun work on arrangements for the testing programme, and
will continue to do so in close collaboration with DCMS and UK Sport.
Funding for the 2012 anti-doping programme is the responsibility of LOCOG, and as such
is already factored into LOCOG’s budget.
The remit of LOCOG, and any role for UK Sport, will be developed as these plans
progress.
27. We recommend that immediate mechanisms be put in place by UK Sport to
learn how other countries have managed doping during large international sporting
events. We recommend that the Government liaise actively with WADA, IOC and
other governments to ensure that the UK is not only well prepared for anti-doping
during the 2012 Games, but that there is a clear understanding of the protocols the
UK must have in place. (Paragraph 111)
Government Response
Government has full confidence in the experience and expertise that UK Sport has in the
management of anti-doping testing programmes at major events.
To illustrate, UK Sport has first hand experience of managing the entire testing programme
for the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester. This included the planning, collection
and transportation of 1000 samples over ten days.
In addition to this, staff from UK Sport have been actively involved in 110 major events
since 1997. These include first hand involvement in the management of anti-doping with
the Athens 2004 and Torino 2006 Organising Committees, and participation in WADA’s
Independent Observer Programme at the DOHA Asian Games.

16

As a result of this extensive experience, UK Sport has a clear understanding of the
protocols that are required to help deliver a successful Games-time testing programme, and
so will work with LOCOG as the organisation with responsibility for this programme.
In order to ensure that UK is well prepared, DCMS and UK Sport shall continue with the
existing practice of co-ordinating with the relevant international bodies, including LOCOG
as mentioned, in the run up to the 2012 Games.
28. We recommend that the Government develop an action plan in conjunction with
UK Sport to ensure that the UK is prepared for anti-doping well in advance of the
2012 Games. (Paragraph 111)
Government Response
Government fully recognises the responsibility placed on the UK in becoming an Olympic
and Paralympic Games host. As Dick Pound, WADA Chair, has recently said, host nations
have a responsibility to demonstrate their commitment to drug free sport.
We acknowledge the Committee’s call for Government and UK Sport to develop an action
plan in advance of the 2012 Games. It has always been our intention to do so at the
appropriate time, which will be at the beginning of the four year cycle after the Beijing
Games.
During Games-time, the anti-doping programme is the responsibility of the International
Olympic Committee (IOC) and the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) who will
delegate the responsibilities relating to the operation of anti-doping programmes to
LOCOG. LOCOG will run the programme in accordance with the requirement of the IOC,
IPC and WADA. LOCOG is currently considering how it will operate this programme.
29. We recommend that mechanisms be put in place for informed liaison between
UK Sport or any replacement anti-doping authority and HM Revenue and Customs
to identify and monitor prohibited substances brought into the UK which may be
intended for use during the 2012 Olympic Games. (Paragraph 112)
Government Response
DCMS acknowledges the Committee’s call for closer working with HMRC. As set out in
our response to Recommendation 23, DCMS and HMRC are working together to establish
what information and intelligence can be shared with regards to doping substances. Also,
HMRC is part of the cross-government Inter Departmental Group which considers
departmental planning for the 2012 Games and its legacy.
Furthermore, LOCOG is currently considering whether there are any further requirements
with specific relation to Games-time.
30. We should like to see a culture of ‘openness’ developed and maintained in which
athletes can easily access help and advice in situations where use of legal HETs may
be appropriate. UK Sport should take the lead in fostering this approach through its
links with the national sporting bodies. (Paragraph 115)
Government Response
Government agrees with the Committee’s view regarding the importance of legal Human
Enhancement Technologies, and is confident that the culture of ‘openness’ the Committee
calls for in supporting athletes’ exploitation of these HETs, already exists.

17

UK Sport’s core values of ‘Commitment to Excellence’, ‘Integrity and Openness’, and
‘Working Together’ support its commitment to ‘openness’ as recommended by the
Committee.
UK Sport's support of athletes goes well beyond financial investment. It is recognised that
for athletes to succeed at the highest level, a range of world-class support mechanisms
need to be in place around them. With this in mind, UK Sport works closely with partner
organisations, specifically national sporting bodies, to ensure that our athletes benefit from
the best possible coaching and sports science and medicine support.
Funding is targeted at athletes via their sport's governing body, through the World Class
Pathway programmes. Podium and Development level athletes will be surrounded by a
performance programme that includes coaching, training and competition support,
medical and scientific services and access to the best facilities.
Alongside UK Sport's work with National Governing Bodies and elite athletes through the
World Class Pathway, there is also an additional network of partner organisations which
complements the work and objectives of UK Sport and forms a vital element of the elite
sport community. These other key partners include the British Olympic Association, the
British Paralympic Association, the Institute Network and the Home Country Sports
Councils.
UK Sport’s significant investment in scientific and medical support ensures that we are in
regular contact with National Governing Bodies to ensure British athletes have access to
the most innovative, legitimate techniques to improve performance.
31. We recommend that the Government review the quality of sports science
research in the UK and implement mechanisms for enhancing training and support
where required. (Paragraph 118)
Government Response
Government agrees with the Committee’s view that sport is big business in the UK, and
that this should be underpinned by the highest quality sports science research. We are
confident that research undertaken in the UK is of a very high quality, and that the UK has
an excellent reputation within the international academic community for the quality of its
sports science research.
UK Sport and the English Institute for Sport (EIS) regularly review current research in
order to relate its application to sport. This is primarily carried out through literature
reviews, attending relevant conferences and reviewing relevant journal articles.
However, the Government acknowledges that there may be limitations to the way in which
research is directly applied to sport or meets the needs and priorities within the sports
programmes. The Research Councils have confirmed that they carry out sports related
research, as set out in more detail below, but that proposals for this research often have to
be considered alongside proposals for research into areas which may be accorded higher
priority.
Where, in evaluating this current research, UK Sport identifies research requirements
which are not being met, it does, through its research and development programme, have
the mechanisms in place to seek to address this information gap. It will look to identify
relevant research partners from the University or Industrial sectors; project managing,
funding and supporting the delivery of that work; and communicating that information to
other sports where the information may be of value.
18

UK Sport is also in the process of setting up an annual programme to engage more actively
with the research community, and to seek further ways to apply research to the sporting
sphere. This is expected to include some annual competitive awards to capture new and
exciting ideas where research can have a performance impact in Olympic and Paralympic
sport, with additional funding to take these ideas forward; annual awards for graduates to
further investigate where project ideas are seen as ‘innovative’ and can provide a
significant breakthrough in practice; and an annual competitive award to reward those
establishments which have established a key critical line of inquiry over a period of time
which has had an indirect impact on behaviour and practice in elite sport.
In addition, UK Sport is about to look to recruit research experts onto an advisory panel,
specialising in the key priority sports science research themes which have emerged from a
recent survey of staff (coaches, scientists, medics) within the high performance
community. This exercise will provide small teams of expertise to drive forward specific
areas of research pertinent to the needs of Olympic and Paralympic sport.
Government will continue to discuss with UK Sport how we can better direct and influence
sports science research to benefit high performance sport, and will consider what more we
can do to assist this process.
32. We recommend that the Research Councils include research into sports science
within their funding remits. Furthermore, we urge the co-ordinating body, Research
Councils UK to examine the ways in which sports science could be more effectively
served across the Research Councils. (Paragraph 121)
Government Response
Sports related research is part of the remit of the Research Councils. For example, the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) is funding the new “Sports
Engineering: Simulation, Analysis, Methodology, Evolution” initiative at Loughborough
University, which is looking at improving the design and manufacture of sports equipment.
It is also funding research at Aston University to develop masts for racing yachts
incorporating a stress monitoring system.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) and Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBSRC) currently fund research in a number of areas which have
relevance to elite athletes, including muscle physiology, cardiac function, respiratory
function, cartilage repair, bone biology, immunology, nutrition and the area of
psychological interventions.
In addition, the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) is developing a
collaborative research investment which is intended to address issues relevant to sports
participation, elite sport and benefits from all kinds of sport e.g. in public health and
economic regeneration.
As the examples above demonstrate, the Research Councils fund a range of research which
is relevant to sport in a variety of different contexts. There is very high demand for
Research Council funding and competition is intense. Proposals for sports research are
reviewed on their merits alongside research proposals in other areas, which may currently
be accorded higher priority for the Research Councils.

19

Research Council UK (RCUK) has a role in facilitating and coordinating research that
spans the remit of more than one Council. It has already set up a cross-Research Council
group to develop an RCUK strategy for the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics, where the
challenge falls within their interests and activities, and is working closely with the
Department for Trade and Industry (DTI) on this.
In terms of contributing to the competitiveness of Team GB, EPSRC and UK Sport are
working together to explore the potential for research in engineering and the physical
sciences to support elite athlete performance. UK Sport has analysed EPSRC’s research
database for funded projects that could offer the opportunity of knowledge/technology
transfer into a sporting context. Three such pilot projects have been funded.
In addition, a series of workshops have been held based on three challenge areas identified
by UK Sport (real time physiological measurement, sports equipment and sailing) where
engineering and physical sciences research could provide a significant competitive edge.
Feasibility funds have been secured to facilitate the development of projects to address
sporting challenges resulting from the workshops and 25 such projects are currently
undergoing peer review.
ESRC is also funding Olympic studentships to enable the UK’s most talented sportsmen
and women to combine the requirements of extended academic study and development of
sporting excellence. MRC studentships also offer significant flexibility which may appeal
to athletes and trainers.
The Research Councils recognise that there is always scope to increase the overall quality
of sports-based research in the UK, although it may not be easy to define what ‘sports
science research’ is and sporting applications may emerge from apparently unrelated
programmes. The Research Councils would be willing to assist in a review of sports-based
research, for example in the identification of appropriate research expertise.
33. We recommend that the Government develop a specific funding stream for
research into legal mechanisms for enhancing human performance in sport.
(Paragraph 122)
Government Response
Government and National Lottery funding for elite sport is channelled through UK Sport,
which delivers the World Class Pathway Programme to athletes and the National
Governing Bodies, and DCMS does not intend to introduce separate funding streams. This
is currently catered for by the Research Councils UK.
The Committee will recognise that at the very highest level of sport, the difference
between success and failure can be minimal and enhancing athlete and technical
performance is critical to future success. For example, the combined time difference
between five gold medals won in the Athens Olympic Games and silver was half a second.
This is precisely the role of UK Sport’s World Class Pathway Programme, supported by the
EIS. The NGBs can access leading edge advice and technology to support their own high
performance programmes, and UK Sport is engaged in some very exciting but confidential
work to benefit some Olympic sports.

20

Since 2004, UK Sport has operated a Research and Development programme, the budget
for which has doubled since we won the right to host the 2012 Games. This is a sport-led
programme which provides discrete performance solutions according to the needs and
priorities of identified Lottery funded sports. Much of this work remains confidential and
may therefore not enter the public domain due to the need to retain performance
advantages prior to Beijing, Vancouver and London.
The EIS is also leading the way. For example, the EIS has developed ‘The Sporting Edge’
environmental chamber to help our athletes acclimatise to different climatic conditions. It
is located at Bisham Abbey, and is the largest non-military facility of its kind in Europe.
UK Sport is currently developing additional small centres of excellence of research around
critical priority areas in elite sport to ensure our athletes can compete at the highest level.
These will complement programmes already in place but will be based around the needs
and priorities of the sports. This strategy would provide a ‘unique’ world leading approach
to research in elite sport.
But the Government and UK Sport recognise that we cannot afford to stand still in this
area. For example, it is notable that at the recent World Swimming Championships in
Melbourne, the 7th placed swimmer in a semi-final recorded a time that would have won
a gold medal at the last Championships two years ago.
That’s why we have been working to forge stronger links with both industry and the
Research Councils to consider what more can be done to give our talented athletes the
edge.
34. We urge UK Sport to develop formal mechanisms for the sharing of knowledge
and information between the different sectors and to look at mechanisms for
maximising the application of knowledge already in existence to the benefit of sport
in the UK. Furthermore, we recommend that the UK Research Councils identify
mechanisms for enhancing the sharing of information relevant to sports science
between the different academic disciplines. (Paragraph 129)
Government Response
Government welcomes the Committee’s recognition of the work UK Sport is doing with
the EPSRC to address the issues of the transfer of knowledge across the different sectors.
This area of work is in its infancy, and both Government and UK Sport are aware that
dividends may be reaped by dedicating greater focus to this. Indeed, UK Sport is extremely
keen to build on these links.
As set out in the response to Recommendation 31 and 32, UK Sport fully intends to evolve
the work it has been doing with the research community, and in doing so will seek to
maximise input from the range of sectors the Committee mentions in the report.
The Research Councils have also indicated their willingness to work with Government and
UK Sport in taking this work forward.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID5564369 04/07 366364
Printed on Paper containing 75% fibre content minimum.

21

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail,Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

ISBN 978-0-10-170882-1

9 780101 708821

