DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response
to the Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee Report
on Tourism

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2008

Cm 7487

£5.50

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response
to the Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee Report
on Tourism

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2008

Cm 7487

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2008
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or
agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing
it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be
acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document speciﬁed.
Where we have identiﬁed any third party copyright material you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please write to Ofﬁce of Public Sector
Information, Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or
e-mail: licensing@opsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 978 0 10 174872 8

DCMS RESPONSE TO SELECT COMMITTEE
REPORT ON TOURISM
General/Introductory
The Department for Culture, Media & Sport (“the DCMS”) is pleased to have the opportunity to
respond to the conclusions and recommendations of the Culture, Media & Sport Committee’s (“the
Committee’s”) Tourism Inquiry.
The DCMS welcomes this report which is the result of one of the largest Inquiries the Committee
has ever carried out. It was also, with over 100 submissions being received, very wide-ranging and
covered matters which are, and will continue to be, important to the future of the United Kingdom’s
tourism industry.
The DCMS is pleased that the Inquiry recognises the healthy long-term position of the British
tourism industry and that a balance of payments deﬁcit in this sector is an international, rather than
a purely national, phenomenon. The DCMS recognises the importance of the tourism industry to
investment; employment and the British economy generally; and remains wholly committed to its
success, especially during difﬁcult economic circumstances,
Response
The DCMS response to the Inquiry’s 25 conclusions and recommendations follows (for convenience,
we have grouped conclusions 2 and 10 together):
1. It is obviously the case that non-departmental public bodies should always be looking
to run their operations more efﬁciently. However, in the case of VisitBritain, no-one has
demonstrated that there are inefﬁciencies in the way it conducts its operations, and certainly
not of the scale to justify the cut in its resources that is proposed. Instead, we share the view
that VisitBritain is generally a well-run and efﬁcient organisation and regard the Government’s
attempted explanation of its decision as wholly unconvincing. (Paragraph 40)
The DCMS believes that VisitBritain is a well run organisation that has consistently delivered
against its efﬁciency targets. But it considers that there is no contradiction, during a period of severe
ﬁscal constraint, in demanding and driving further efﬁciency from any public body. There is also no
contradiction in expecting such an organisation to respond actively to external developments – in
this case, to changes in the international and domestic tourism markets.
Part of this drive for greater efﬁciency must involve the eradication of duplication; maximum
exploitation of technological developments in the digital world and a constant re-evaluation of the
changing market place. It is vitally important that VisitBritain remains ﬁt for purpose in today’s
rapidly changing economic circumstances and the Government believes that it will need to adapt in
order to generate maximum value from limited resources.
VisitBritain’s marketing activities must not sit in isolation from the wider public support for the
tourism sector at national, regional and local levels; and the development of the tourism product,
which includes commitment to cultural and sporting events in this country, is equally relevant.
As the Committee is aware, at the same time as it announced the outcome of the Comprehensive
Spending Review in October 2007, the DCMS commissioned an ambitious and wide-ranging
review of public sector support for tourism. This, known as the British Tourism Framework Review,
is being led by the Chairman of VisitBritain, Christopher Rodrigues, and nearing completion and
should report shortly. VisitBritain expects to publish its conclusions in November this year.
DCMS is working closely with VisitBritain on the Review and welcomes the commitment and
enthusiasm it has shown in the scrutiny of options for the reform and re-vitalisation of its operations
at home and overseas.

1

As a result, the DCMS is conﬁdent that the results of the Framework Review will show that
VisitBritain has moved beyond the understandably negative predictions that it made in its evidence
to the Inquiry and that it will shortly be in position to deliver an even better service to the tourism
industry.
The economic situation means that the ﬁscal environment is becoming ever tighter and the Government
will not hesitate to press for ever greater efﬁciencies in public expenditure. Prioritisation of limited
resources will continue to drive reform and decisions.
2. While recognising the tightness of this year’s public expenditure settlement, we ﬁnd
it extraordinary that Ministers took the decision to concentrate all of the pain on the
Department’s funding for tourism. Indeed, we believe that there was a strong case for increasing
the resources available to VisitBritain given the evidence of the economic beneﬁts that can
result and the unique opportunity provided by the forthcoming 2012 London Olympic and
Paralympic Games. The decision to cut resources is simply bafﬂing and should be reconsidered.
(Paragraph 41)
10. It is regrettable that the Government is committed to a Comprehensive Spending
Review settlement so close to London 2012 with a substantial funding reduction for the body
responsible for marketing the UK overseas. We do not doubt that there are other factors which
will underpin the delivery of DCMS’s Olympic tourism strategy, but effective marketing
of the UK overseas must be a priority. We believe that it is not too late to realise fully the
tourism beneﬁts of the Games, but a greater investment from the Government is necessary. We
recommend that provision is made as soon as possible for additional funding for VisitBritain
speciﬁcally for this purpose. (Paragraph 89)
The DCMS’s Memorandum to the Committee detailed how the Government’s investment in tourism
across the UK has increased signiﬁcantly over the last decade. It was, therefore, pleased that the
Inquiry endorsed the Government’s ﬁgure for total UK tourism funding of £348.4 million (as set
out in the table at paragraph 30), and acknowledged the present investment of £500 million a year in
improving the industry’s skills base (as discussed further at the response to the Inquiry’s conclusion
no. 15 below). These ﬁgures show that public investment in support of the tourism industry is
substantially higher than it was in 1997.
This places an even greater responsibility on all public bodies, including VisitBritain, to ensure that
maximum value is added by their efforts in a modern and changing market.
Investment in visitor experience and the tourism product is as important to the growth of the visitor
economy as marketing. The Government’s investment in skills; the quality of accommodation; the
Olympic and Paralympic Games; the Cultural Olympiad; free museums and galleries; heritage and
seaside resorts are all critical to overall success. The potential tourism legacy of the Olympics is
focused on our welcome, quality, skills and ultimately, the product we offer.
The Government is conﬁdent that the emerging structures from the Strategic Framework Review
will strengthen VisitBritain and Visit England’s capabilities to deliver in the 21st century and ensure
a proper balance between our marketing effort at home and abroad and public investment in our
tourism product.
The Committee will be fully aware of the serious challenges currently facing the British economy.
No part of the public sector can be immune from a robust and constant re-evaluation of every
priority and its expenditure. At present, the Government is focusing its priorities on the visitor
experience and the tourism product. But it would be wrong to imply that it has made it impossible
for VisitBritain to fulﬁll its aims in respect of marketing. Over £130 million is being invested in
VisitBritain over the three years of the Spending Review period.

2

3. There is a danger that in seeking to secure greater funding from non-Government sources,
VisitBritain’s role in marketing the UK may be compromised, and VisitBritain should ensure
it strikes an appropriate balance when agreeing commercial deals. However, on balance,
we believe this is less damaging to the industry than the alternative of a blind reliance on
Government funding. (Paragraph 49)
The DCMS agrees that VisitBritain must ensure that it balances its reliance on public funding with
an appropriate level of partnership income from the private sector.
In setting Funding Agreement targets for VisitBritain, the DCMS has reﬂected the need for this
appropriate balance. For the last completed Funding Agreement cycle, the targets set for external
partnership investment were as follows:
Year
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08

Income from Private Sector
£4 million
£4.5 million
£5 million

The justiﬁcation for Government investment in tourism is, in part, the need to recognise that out of
approximately 180,000 businesses involved in the sector, the vast majority are SMEs with severe
limitations on the extent to which they can be expected to co-ordinate marketing effort. This factor
also limits the partnership income which VisitBritain can expect to raise from the sector.
VisitBritain’s partnership income does not only come from the tourism industry, but also from
other public bodies. It carries out work for the Regional Development Agencies, which are funded
centrally, and the Devolved Administrations of Wales and Scotland. For the last completed Funding
Agreement cycle, the targets set for external public sector partnership investment were as follows:
Year
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08

Income from other parts of the public sector
£15.5 million
£16.5 million
£18.5 million

In 2007-2008 VisitBritain exceeded both its targets for private and public partnership income.
VisitBritain’s Accounts and Report for the year ended 31 March 2008 show that it generated nonGovernment partnership income of £21.959 million in 2007-08, of which £6.3 million was from the
private sector.
4. VisitBritain’s network of overseas ofﬁces plays a major role in attracting overseas visitors
to the UK. We understand that a certain amount of readjustment on the part of VisitBritain
will be necessary in response to its budget cut, but we urge it to prioritise the maintenance,
wherever possible, of its overseas ofﬁces. The closure or relocation of ofﬁce space could, in fact,
prove more expensive to the taxpayer in the long term. (Paragraph 50)
The DCMS asked VisitBritain to consider the scope for streamlining its ofﬁce network, in order to
ensure that it is appropriate for the 21st Century and the emergence of new markets. The work has
been undertaken by VisitBritain in co-operation with DCMS, the Foreign Ofﬁce and the British
Council.
The detailed scrutiny of the Strategic Framework Review will enable a better prioritisation of
the overseas marketing effort, including recommendations on the future of the overseas network.
VisitBritain has already announced plans to reduce the numbers of staff it employs overseas and
numbers are expected to reduce by 25%. DCMS does not accept that the Committee’s ﬁnding that
closure of the Dublin ofﬁce was “a false economy”. Responsibility for marketing in Ireland lies with
the RDAs; VisitScotland; VisitWales and Visit London. The Framework Review should ensure that
there is no duplication of effort in established markets.
3

5. As things stand, there are insufﬁcient incentives for local authorities to invest in tourism.
The fact that tourism is a discretionary function means that it is always susceptible to a reduction
in funding when budgets become tight. Yet in many local authorities, tourism represents a very
signiﬁcant sector of the economy and investment in the industry should be seen as a necessity
rather than a luxury. (Paragraph 54)
The DCMS agrees that local authorities play an essential role in the delivery of public sector support
for tourism and that their investment in it should be a priority. However, following a number of crossGovernment consultations – most recently, in the context of the Local Government White Paper –
the DCMS agrees with the Department for Communities and Local Government’s (the DCLG) view
that making tourism a statutory requirement would conﬂict with Government’s determination to
devolve decision making to local government.
The DCMS therefore, agrees that tourism should remain a discretionary function but believes that
better engagement and integration is necessary between national and local government. In this, the
aim of the DCMS is to encourage councils to take the needs of the visitor economy seriously, whilst
accepting that a “no one size ﬁts all” approach is appropriate for tourism at local level. The DCMS
has acted on this as follows:

s

by working successfully with local government and the Tourism Alliance to develop
improved Guidance for local authority Planning and Tourism Ofﬁcers;

s

by inviting the Local Government Association to join the Minister for Culture, Creative
Industries and Tourism’s 2012 Ministerial Advisory Group, together with the Tourism
Together umbrella body (which represents Destination Performance UK, the British
Resorts and Destinations Association, the Tourism Management Institute, the Tourism
Society and the Institute for Sports, Parks and Leisure); and

s

by fully supporting the Partners for England initiative, including its work towards producing
Place Making: A Charter for Destination Management, which advises local authorities
on embedding the needs of the visitor economy into improvement plans for workforce
development, the labour market, and economic development..

6. We welcome the new fund to support England’s seaside resorts, many of which struggle
to maintain visitor numbers. It is essential that the funds are spent wisely, not just to maximise
the beneﬁt to the resorts, but also to demonstrate to the Treasury that such an investment is
effective and worthwhile. There are clearly limits to the difference £45 million over three years
can make to England’s many seaside resorts. We recommend that the Government evaluates
the wider economic impact of the fund to see whether the returns justify an increase in its size.
(Paragraph 59)
The DCMS welcomes the Inquiry’s support for the SeaChange programme, which is an important
initiative with the potential to make a signiﬁcant difference to coastal resorts. Its aim is to
identify capital investments in cultural assets in seaside towns which could become a catalyst for
regeneration.
On 1 August 2008, the Minister for Culture, Creative Industries and Tourism announced details of
the projects which will receive will receive large grants in the ﬁrst year of the programme:

s
s
s

4

Blackpool – the Tower Festival Headland Project (£4 million);
Dover – Connecting Culture’s Project at Dover Castle (£3.85 million); and
Torbay – the Cockington Court & Berry Head “On-the-Edge” projects within the English
Riviera Geopark (£2.25 million).

Applications for the Open Application programme (small grants) in the ﬁrst year are currently
being assessed by the Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (the CABE), and its
Partnership Panel will meet shortly to decide on the ﬁnal funding allocations.
The deadline for expressions of interest for large grants in the second year of the programme was
30 June 2008. Full applications are due by 31 October 2008, and decisions on funding will be made
in January 2009.
The DCMS regards the initial investments made through the SeaChange programme as “seed corn”
funding, designed to promote wider processes of regeneration. They are prioritised for projects which
demonstrate longer term impacts on towns and communities and the DCMS will work encourage
other agencies to make similar, longer term, investment in culture in seaside resorts.The Committee
should note that the successful large grant projects are, for the most part, being “match-funded” by
the appropriate Regional Development Agencies (RDAs).
The CABE has included the requirement for full evaluation as part of the criteria for the projects. All
applicants must describe how they plan to evaluate the outcomes of their projects and must include
the measurement and methodologies they will use. In addition, the CABE will be commissioning
an independent evaluation of the SeaChange programme as a whole, including assessments of the
wider economic impacts of investment. This assessment of the impact of individual SeaChange
projects, and of the programme as a whole, will inform future decisions on the amount of funding
to be allocated to the initiative.
7. The publication of the list of sports facilities that will appear in the London 2012 preGames training camp guide generated substantial media coverage and it may have raised
expectations beyond a reasonable level. There are no guarantees as to which areas National
Olympic/Paralympic Committees will choose for their athletes, or indeed whether they will
locate themselves in the UK for pre-Games camps at all. (Paragraph 71)
The Government is working actively to ensure that the beneﬁts of hosting training camps are
maximised and is pleased that the Inquiry recognised that it “ has been keen to ensure that the
beneﬁts are, as far as possible, shared between the nations and regions” (at paragraph 63).
As the Inquiry notes, it is for the 205 National Olympic Committees (NOCs), and 162 National
Paralympic Committees (NPCs), across the world to decide on the locations of their training
camps (and, indeed, to decide on whether to have a camp at all). The aim of the London Organising
Committee for the Olympic Games (LOCOG) is to ensure that all national Olympic teams have
access to high quality training arrangements and locations in the UK. At this stage, it is too early to
project what the take-up rate will be.
The number of national teams which used training camps in the host country was lower in the 2004
Games in Athens than it had been in Atlanta or Sydney, partly because many of the European teams
chose to stay at home.
LOCOG’s approach to helping teams to prepare for their participation in 2012 has been praised
by the International Olympic and International Paralympic Committees. The Pre-Games Training
Camp (PGTC) Guide to National Olympic Committees was launched on 14 August, and the PGTC
Guide to National Paralympic Committees on 15 September. Both Guides are intended:

s

to inform NOCs and NPCs of the breadth and depth of sporting facilities available in the
UK; and

s

to provide information for locations in the UK’s nations and regions about the available
opportunities for networking, and on how to target likely NOCs and NPCs.

5

Both Guides emphasize that 2012 is for the whole of the UK, not just for London, and this overall
message is also made clear on VisitBritain’s website (on which the Guides are an online resource).
The Guides feature a total of 640 facilities across the UK, including a total of 175 Paralympic
facilities. Every nation and region is represented. The list is not set in stone, and new facilities can
be included on application to LOCOG. LOCOG has also carried out a series of workshops to advise
potential training camp locations on marketing and branding.
In addition, LOCOG has introduced a Training Camp Financial Award Scheme, which can offer up
to £25,000 in funding for facilities to attract NOCs & NPCs. The Scheme is designed to cover direct
costs incurred at the camp, including venue hire, accommodation, local transport, medical services
and security.
8. The very fact that the Olympic and Paralympic Games are hosted by cities and not
countries inevitably limits the extent to which areas outside the host city can expect to beneﬁt.
From a tourism perspective, there are some limited short-term beneﬁts to be realised outside
London. However, we doubt whether these are as great, or as certain, as the Government has
suggested. The principal tourism potential of the Games, in London and the rest of the UK,
lies in the positive legacy that would be created by the effective promotion and delivery of a
top-class Games. (Paragraph 73)
The DCMS agrees that the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games should provide an important
legacy for the British tourism industry. However, it is more optimistic about the potential beneﬁts
to the rest of Britain outside London and commissioned research into the economic beneﬁts of the
Games from VisitBritain and Visit London in 2007.
The resulting research report – The Value of the Olympic and Paralympic Games to UK Tourism
– included a central projection for tourism beneﬁts across the UK of £2.1 billion and estimated
that £600 million of these beneﬁts will be outside of London. In arriving at these ﬁgures, Oxford
Economic Forecasting (the research company appointed by VisitBritain and Visit London) considered
the economic effects of sports and other major events over the last 15 years. These included FIFA
World Cups, UEFA European Football Championships, Olympic Games, and World Expos.
Some of these beneﬁts outside London will come from the Cultural Olympiad (and the DCMS
was pleased that the Inquiry recognised that the industry is broadly supportive of the concept of
the Cultural Olympiad, at paragraph 69 of the report). Other beneﬁts will come from hosting the
training camps. But, in general, the DCMS agrees that the greater part of the economic beneﬁt – in
London, as in the nations and regions – will come from the legacy of the Games.
The Inquiry notes that the 2012 Games are already acting as a catalyst for a “step change” in
the performance of the industry (at paragraph 82 of its report). As the Committee is aware, the
DCMS published its strategy for making the most of the legacy in September 2007 – Winning (the
DCMS Tourism Strategy for 2012 and Beyond.) The strategy includes an ambitious programme of
improvement in key areas of marketing, the welcome, workforce skills, and product quality.
9. We regret that there are no plans for any brand to be generally available for use by
tourism businesses. This is a missed opportunity which reduces the potential for tourism
businesses to gain maximum beneﬁt from the Games, and we urge that this be reconsidered.
(Paragraph 76)
The Inquiry notes the general restrictions on the use the International Olympic Committee’s branding
(at paragraph 74 of its report). This has limited the marketing opportunities for the Tourism industry.
However, the DCMS and VisitBritain have been actively working with LOCOG to produce effective
and useable, non-commercial branding for use by tourism businesses.
The result is a toolkit for use by tourism organisations in the private and public sector, based on a
“Be a Part of It” strapline and drawing on effective visual images of London and the UK. This has

6

been approved by LOCOG for international use only. The DCMS, VisitBritain and LOCOG are
currently seeking to agree a similar branding package for domestic use. The nations and regions of
the UK will be fully involved.
In this work, LOCOG has shown itself to be extremely supportive of plans to engage the tourism
industry in work around the Games, including efforts led by the DCMS to improve the quality of the
welcome afforded to international visitors, the skills of the tourism workforce, and the quality and
accessibility of the tourism product.
11. If planned, marketed, and delivered successfully, major events can provide short-term
economic beneﬁts, together with the opportunity for a lasting legacy. We are hugely encouraged
by the calibre of events that the UK is now attracting on a regular basis. In particular, we
congratulate Glasgow on its successful bid to host the 2014 Commonwealth Games. These
Games represent a real opportunity to maintain the momentum that we hope will be generated
by a successful London Olympic and Paralympic Games. We recommend that the organisers
of the London and Glasgow Games work closely together, and ensure that any lessons learnt
from London are applied to Glasgow. (Paragraph 93)
The DCMS is aware that major events are a vital part of the UK’s tourism offer and shares the
Inquiry’s pleasure in Glasgow’s success in securing the 2014 Commonwealth Games. Its Ministers
offered full involvement in the preparations for the 2014 Games shortly after Glasgow’s bid was
successful. At the suggestion of the Commonwealth Games Council, the DCMS is now working
closely with the Organising Company on ticket touting and other issues.
The DCMS also fully agrees with the Inquiry’s assessment of the importance of major sporting
and other events to the industry. Over recent years, VisitBritain has worked closely with UK Sport
to ensure that tourism’s resources are used to support efforts to secure international sports events,
wherever possible. In addition, the DCMS fully supports the Football Association’s efforts to secure
the 2018 World Cup.
The DCMS also does all it can to secure major business events, not only for signiﬁcant ﬁnancial
beneﬁts of visitor spending, but also for the opportunities these present for the wider British
economy. Since the September 2007 publication of Winning (the DCMS Tourism Strategy for 2012
and Beyond), DCMS Ministers have worked to secure cross-Government support for large business
events bids. The Minister for Creative Industries and Tourism wrote to her Ministerial colleagues
(including Regional Ministers) in January 2008, stressing the importance of supporting such bids.
VisitBritain established eventBritain in July 2007 to provide a tourism-based support service for
British cities, regions, or nations, bidding to host major international events. It offers bidding
support, marketing advice, and assistance with research. VisitBritain will also shortly be setting up
a new events and conferences group to establish what needs to be done to build on the UK’s already
world-class position in events organisation and delivery.
12. We are satisﬁed that DCMS is the correct government “home” for tourism and advise
against any further organisational change. However, this does not mean we are satisﬁed with
DCMS’s performance on tourism. We are concerned by the lack of conﬁdence the industry
appears to have in DCMS. We are also discouraged that responsibility for tourism has been
so frequently transferred between Departmental Ministers creating an impression that it is
seen as an afterthought which has to ﬁt in with their other responsibilities. This impression is
strengthened by the fact that the Minister with responsibility for tourism no longer has this
recognised in their ofﬁcial title and we recommend that this is reinstated in the title of the
responsible Minister. That said, there are some isolated signs that the Department is beginning
to represent the industry better across government. We would like to see more consistent
evidence that tourism is becoming a mainstream issue in government. We would also like to
see DCMS provide a stronger strategic lead to the industry, and we hope that the new national
tourism strategy represents a willingness to do so. (Paragraph 98)
7

The DCMS welcomes the Inquiry’s conclusion that this Department is the correct home for tourism
policy in government. Its Ministers and ofﬁcials take their roles as champions and advocates of the
tourism industry very seriously indeed. The DCMS also makes full use of its links to other sectors
relevant to the tourism industry (including museums, the arts, and broadcasting) and of the fact that
it has strategic oversight for the 2012 Olympic Games and Paralympic Games.
The DCMS considers that its advocacy role across Government has produced tangible results for the
industry in recent years, including:

s

more tourism-friendly strategic planning guidance for local authorities, as a result of
intensive (and DCMS-led) discussions with the DCLG, the Tourism Alliance, and other
organisations over 2004-07;

s

a quick and decisive Government rejection of proposals for a tourism “bed tax” at the time
of the 2007 Budget; and

s

a highly-visible Prime Ministerial lead on tourism issues during the ﬂooding of the summer
of 2007.

The DCMS is also pleased that the Inquiry has concluded that the Winning (the DCMS Tourism
Strategy for 2012 and Beyond) demonstrates its willingness and ability to offer an effective national
lead to the tourism industry and to the public sector organisations which support it.
The DCMS is a little confused by the Inquiry’s recommendation on Ministerial titles. Since she
joined the DCMS, the Departmental title of the Rt Hon Margaret Hodge MP has been “Minister for
Culture, Creative Industries, and Tourism”. This has been made clear on written material and on the
DCMS’s website, and there are no plans for a change of Ministerial title in the future.
13. The restructuring of the tourism industry in 2003 devolved responsibility for tourism
to the RDAs. While this has given the regions a greater say in how they develop the industry,
it has also resulted in tourism nationwide becoming fragmented, with widespread variation
between regions as to the signiﬁcance attached to it. There is a lack of overall strategic direction,
which only DCMS can provide. Meanwhile, we encourage the RDAs to work together through
initiatives such as Partners for England to share best practice and ensure a more coordinated
approach to tourism development in England. (Paragraph 103)
The DCMS is actively working to provide a meaningful and powerful lead for tourism support across
the whole public sector. As part of this, it published Winning (the DCMS Tourism Strategy for 2012
and Beyond) in September 2007. The Inquiry welcomed this (as conﬁrmed in its conclusion no. 12),
it was told, did the RDAs (paragraph 84). The DCMS has ensured that the RDAs are in a position
to contribute fully to the implementation of the Strategy through the Minister for Culture, Creative
Industries and Tourism’s 2012 Advisory Group.
The DCMS believes that the public sector re-structuring in 2003 that gave responsibility for tourism
in the regions to the RDAs has been a success. Each of these has developed individual tourism
strategies, with associated delivery structures based on their particular needs and priorities. This has
resulted in signiﬁcant added investment in tourism as well as a much closer ﬁt with the RDAs’ wider
regional economic strategies. The DCMS will continue to provide substantial ﬁnancial support to
the RDAs over the next Spending Review period, and its relationships with them are structured in
such a way as to include full opportunities for the DCMS to comment on, and help shape, regional
strategies.
As such, the DCMS and VisitBritain already work closely with the RDAs. But we agree that there
is a case for better overall co-ordination of policy and resource. That is why we have consistently
supported the Partners for England initiative in its work to improve tourism marketing, research
and data, skills, “place-making”, and local authority engagement, and to ensure better strategic
leadership in the domestic market through VisitEngland. The DCMS has also ensured that improved
domestic co-ordination is a priority of the present Tourism Framework Review.
8

14. Raising the quality of accommodation is essential to improving the industry and the
NQAS is an important tool in this regard. We support the Government’s efforts to increase the
number of accredited accommodation providers within a single recognised scheme, but agree
that the scheme should remain voluntary. However, we recommend that the scheme be made
more ﬂexible so as not to disadvantage smaller or unorthodox accommodation providers.
We recommend that the costs for smaller providers are reduced in order to take account of
their lower turnover, perhaps to be balanced by increased fees charged to the larger hotels.
(Paragraph 110)
The DCMS welcomes the Inquiry’s conclusion that the National Quality Assessment Schemes
(NQAS) should remain voluntary and its support for the Government’s efforts to increase the number
of accredited accommodation providers within a single recognised scheme.
The DCMS is also pleased that the Inquiry has recognised (at paragraph 105) the achievement of
the DCMS; VisitBritain; VisitScotland; VisitWales and the Automobile Association in agreeing,
and implementing, common criteria for assessment and grading. Since 2005-06, domestic and
international consumers have had conﬁdence in a single, national set of standards under the “stargrading” schemes.
The Inquiry also recognised the Government’s efforts to increase participation in the NQAS. These
include work towards a general policy of using only NQAS-assessed properties for Government hotel
and accommodation use, wherever possible. A formal policy to that effect would almost certainly
be in contravention of UK and European competition law. However, as announced in Winning (the
DCMS Tourism Strategy for 2012 and Beyond) in September 2007, following discussions with the
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce and the major suppliers of hotel booking services to the public
sector, the beneﬁts of using NQAS-assessed properties as best practice for ofﬁcial travel is being
made clear to all public sector users of the latter booking services.
Although the DCMS believes that the NQAS assessment framework provides signiﬁcant business
beneﬁts for accommodation providers of all sizes, it recognises that the costs of this may act as a
disincentive to participation by smaller businesses. The DCMS is aware of the subsidies offered to
businesses by the London Development Agency. However, it believes that the adoption of a national
scheme which offered subsidised NQAS participation fees (whether or not designed as a crosssubsidy between larger and smaller businesses) would be in contravention of European State Aid
law. Indeed, the NQAS framework is presently being discussed with the European Commission in the
context of a State Aid complaint against VisitBritain’s EnglandNet internet marketing platform.
The present State Aid case has led to a re-assessment by the DCMS and VisitBritain of the use of
the NQAS schemes. As part of ongoing discussions with the Commission, a lower-cost scheme
is being considered which would provide consumer certainty in the safety and other standards of
accommodation. It is possible that this could be an effective complement to the NQAS schemes.
If introduced, it could well address some of the Inquiry’s concerns about the costs of entry to the
NQAS schemes. However, the Inquiry should be aware that the consideration of the proposed scheme
presently forms part of a current State Aid case. As such, no further details can appropriately be
included in this response.
The DCMS notes that one witness told the Inquiry that much of the industry believes that the main
purpose of NQAS is as a revenue stream for VisitBritain (at paragraph 107). It is important that
this misconception is clariﬁed. VisitBritain’s quality scheme is administered on the basis that fee
income received from participating businesses should match expenditure. The scheme is operated
by a commercial company, GSL Ltd, on behalf of VisitBritain. In 2006-07, VisitBritain was charged
£3.99 million by GSL Ltd for performing this service, and received £3.976 million in fees from
participating businesses. This resulted in a small subsidy of £14,000 from public sources. It is
expected that fee income will fully match expenditure from public sources for future years – but not
that it will produce a surplus for VisitBritain.

9

15. We are encouraged by the level of funding and attention that is being offered to address
the skills deﬁciencies that are constraining the industry. However, it is disappointing that so
few small businesses in the tourism sector actually access the funding available to them for
developing staff skills. While this is to some degree a failing of the businesses themselves, the
Government and its agencies must place greater emphasis on coordinating and promoting
these opportunities. (Paragraph 120)
The DCMS is pleased that the Inquiry recognises the importance of Raising the Bar: the National
Skills Strategy for the Hospitality, Leisure, Travel and Tourism Sector in England (published in
March 2007) and that it is encouraged by the plans it puts forward to address the skills gaps in these
industries. The strategy’s 10-point plan outlines a comprehensive set of long-term measures (as
opposed to short term initiatives) to signiﬁcantly improve skills levels in priority areas by directing
public funding towards the correct solutions in each.
The DCMS agrees with the Inquiry that more must be done to help small businesses access funding
for their staff ’s skills development. As the report highlights, over £500 million a year is spent by the
public sector on skills development in the hospitality, leisure, travel and tourism sector in England
alone. Research carried out by People1st (with over 5,000 businesses, large and small, between
2005 and 2007) has revealed that only 1.5% of small businesses have ever accessed publicly funded
provision. Smaller businesses are less likely to use qualiﬁcations and, for a sector comprising over
two thirds small and micros businesses, 50% of business start-ups fail in their ﬁrst three years of
operation. Employers have said that they want:

s
s
s
s

business courses and qualiﬁcations written for small businesses;
ﬂexible delivery of courses;
one point of contact to understand the different training opportunities available; and
support from experienced operators.

The National Skills Strategy is based on this research and it recognises the needs of small businesses
(point 4 of the 10-point plan).
The development of the UKSP (formerly the UK Skills Passport) provides businesses with an online integrated skills and jobs resource, which includes information on how to access funding as
well as tools that allow employers to match up suitable candidates to vacancies and help develop job
adverts, amongst other things. This resource is particularly useful for small businesses.
As part of the Sector Qualiﬁcations Strategy (point 3 of the 10-point plan), speciﬁc activities have
been identiﬁed to make training and qualiﬁcations more relevant to the needs of small businesses. In
particular, a suite of short programmes for micro businesses will be identiﬁed, and qualiﬁcations and
courses suitable for small businesses will be highlighted on the UKSP. A group of micro businesses
is being established to oversee this and to ensure that delivery and assessment of the training and
qualiﬁcations meets their needs.
The Train to Gain sector compact ‘deal’, agreed between the Department for Innovation, Universities
and Skills (DIUS) and People1st in June 2008, will help employers overcome the difﬁculties they
can face in accessing appropriate training and funding, and releasing staff, with an offer of a
contribution to wage costs for companies with less than 50 employees. The compact will tailor the
Train to Gain service to the speciﬁc needs of the sector, including small businesses, and will ensure
that all brokers are trained in the UKSP, therefore signposting businesses to relevant training and
qualiﬁcations as it is identiﬁed.
Government and its agencies (notably the Learning and Skills Council, Regional Development
Agencies and VisitBritain) have signed up to the strategy and to the implementation of its solutions,
such as the UKSP and improved training and qualiﬁcations. The DCMS is working with these
agencies, DIUS, People1st and the industry to ensure that progress is made with small businesses.
10

16. While we recognise the value of migrant workers to the industry, a reliance on this stream
of labour may not be sustainable in the long term. We would like to see the Government and
its agencies place greater emphasis upon initiatives to attract the locally unemployed to the
industry. At the same time, local authorities and/or RDAs, in partnership with the trade unions,
should ensure that migrant workers are given every opportunity to understand their rights.
(Paragraph 124)
Whilst there is no evidence that migration has contributed to unemployment or caused UK nationals
to be unemployed, the DCMS agrees that it is important to develop the skills of our domestic tourism
workforce and encourage more local people to take jobs in the industry, including the unemployed.
The Government and industry are taking steps to do so.
As discussed above in the response to the Inquiry’s recommendation no. 15, the industry-led National
Skills Strategy aims to improve the skills of those already in the workforce, both those born in the
UK and those born overseas. However, it also aims to attract more people from the UK into the
industry by improving entry routes into the sector (by helping people gain relevant skills before
they start work, while they are in school or further education, and through Apprenticeships) and by
broadening the appeal of the sector (by attracting new pools of labour through promoting careers in
the industry with the best employers and improving perceptions).
The DCMS also agrees with the Inquiry’s assessment of the value of migrant workers and their
skills to the tourism industry. Of workers in the hospitality, leisure, travel and tourism sector,
the percentage of migrant workers employed increased from 17% to 22% over the three years to
2006-07. This reﬂects the high value that the industry places on the skills of migrant workers and
the sector’s need for this labour to help meet skills shortages, for example in recruiting some types
of chefs and cooks (as recognised by the Migration Advisory Committee in its recent recommended
Shortage Occupation List).
Government is committed to working with all relevant parties, including the unions, RDAs and local
authorities, to ensure that migrant workers in the industry are treated fairly and understand their
rights. The UKSP resource will help migrant workers ﬁnd jobs with the best and most responsible
employers.
The Inquiry recognises that efforts are already being made to attract local people, including the
unemployed, into the tourism industry (at paragraph 123) and the Government intends to build on
these successes. In addition to the above this includes: the British Hospitality Associations’ work
in East London to provide work experience opportunities for 15,000 young people; the piloting
of a pre-employability package, developed by People1st, aimed at jobseekers to help tackle the
most critical employability skills needed to work in the sector; and Local Employment Partnerships
which help employers to provide more job opportunities for those most disadvantaged in the labour
market.
17. The high cost of obtaining a visa to visit the UK is one constraint on inbound tourism.
The cost of a UK visa is not competitive with that of our European neighbours and this acts as
a disincentive for those requiring a visa to enter the UK to visit. It is not the only cause of the
recent drop-off in inbound tourism revenues, but it is almost certainly a contributory factor. We
are deeply concerned that the consequences for tourism appear not to have been considered by
the Home Ofﬁce when the new visa charges were drawn up. We strongly recommend reforms
to the current system to address this disincentive and we are therefore encouraged to hear that
there are now ongoing discussions between DCMS and the Home Ofﬁce. We support the plans
for a “Schengen add-on visa”, which would make visits to the UK for those already holding a
Schengen visa a more affordable proposition. We also support moves to introduce a cheaper,
short term, single entry visa. However, these modiﬁcations are unlikely to be possible under
UKvisas’ revenue-neutral model. This system is putting off potential visitors who are likely to
boost the UK economy to a far greater degree than the value of a visa. We recommend that

11

the Government undertakes a cost-beneﬁt study into the effects of reduced visa charges under
certain circumstances, with a view to reforming the present system. (Paragraph 136)
18. We recommend that the Government also reviews the practicalities associated with
obtaining a UK visa. Modiﬁcations to the present system, such as permitting the completion
of visa forms in certain other languages, could make obtaining a visa a simpler process for
prospective visitors without compromising the UK’s national security. (Paragraph 137)
The impact on tourism of changes to the visa fee regime was considered in depth by the Government
and the DCMS was fully involved in discussions at Ministerial level with the Home Ofﬁce; the UK
Borders Agency and others before the changes were ﬁnalised. Since 2007-08, the Government has
implemented a ﬂexible charging model for visa fees, moving away from the previous approach of
simple cost recovery. Fees are now set at levels which reﬂect – amongst other factors – the need to
promote the UK as an attractive destination of choice for legal migrants, including genuine visitors.
The detail of the changes made reﬂect that change of approach:

s

the change in headline fee for a visitor visa application, from £50 in 2006-07 to £63
in 2007-08, incorporated the separate fee paid to commercial partners in over 80% of
applications;

s

this was an average of £13 per application, but ranged from £4 to £45 across the world –
and key new tourism markets such as China and Russia actually saw a decrease in the total
fees payable; and

s

the fee increase of £2 to £65 for 2008-09 was just below inﬂation.

The Government’s recent response to the Visitor Consultation set out its intention to consider – with
stakeholders from a number of relevant sectors who sit on the Visitor Taskforce – the feasibility of
a short-term, single entry visa for spectators at one-off, special or major events. The Government is
also considering the feasibility of a cheaper visa for those who already hold a Schengen visa, and is
currently consulting on other proposals including the possibility of mutual recognition of short term
visitor visas issued by the UK and Irish Governments. The response also conﬁrmed that the length
of leave for a short term visit visa would be retained at six months. This will help to maintain the
UK’s competitiveness with the Schengen area, as a Schengen visa only confers leave of up to three
months.
Recent research funded by the UK Border Agency, the DCMS and the Tourism Alliance concluded
that no direct link between application fees for short term visit visas and demand could be identiﬁed,
except for those with the lowest income in countries with the lowest GDP (where a 100% increase
in the fee might lead to a downward impact of 9% on demand). The Government is now working
with the Visitor Taskforce to consider the wider factors which may have an adverse impact on the
attractiveness of the UK as a destination for genuine tourists.
The Government also keeps the entry clearance process under continuous review, both to evaluate
the success of the implementation of changes to the system but also to ensure the continued delivery
of an effective and high quality service.
The Government has recently decided to retain the visa application form in English only. However, it
has also been decided that the revised guidance to the form will be available in most local languages,
to assist in the better the completion of the forms. This approach will allow the application to be
considered by entry clearance staff who are not necessarily fully ﬂuent in the local language and
allows faster decision-making.
It supports the further implementation of the re-structuring of the visa network along “hub and
spoke” lines, with a view to decisions on entry clearance being made by staff in countries other
than that in which the application was made. This allows a better oversight of decision-making

12

and consistency of approach and service standards. It should also be noted that the increasing use
of online applications also means that not all local languages could be supported by the global
application tool (visa4uk.gov.uk).
19. During our investigation, we received no evidence on the potential impact of the current
entry clearance regime on the availability of visas both generally and in respect of visitors
to the 2012 Games. The recent European Champions League ﬁnal in Moscow, however, does
highlight the dilemmas faced by government when confronted with a rush of applications for
a popular event, even when potential “over-staying” was not an issue. The Government will
clearly have to give considerable thought to this issue in the approach to the 2012 Games.
(Paragraph 138)
The Government agrees that the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games will offer both
opportunities and risks. Planning is already in hand to ensure the quick and effective handling of
the likely surge in visa applications from people associated with the Games, and spectators. In this,
full account is being taken of lessons learnt from events such as the UEFA Cup Final in Manchester
in May 2007.
As set out above in response to the Inquiry’s conclusion no. 17, the Government is also considering
the feasibility of a short-term, single entry visa for spectators at one-off, special or major events.
20. We encourage the other regions to follow London’s lead, and draw on the experience
of the London Development Agency in improving the provision of tourism statistics.
(Paragraph 144)
This is a recommendation for the eight non-London Regional Development Agencies. The DCMS
agrees that the Agencies should consider following London’s lead in the use of the Local Area
Tourism Impact model (as discussed at paragraph 144 of the Report), and suggests that this should
be considered in detail by the English Tourism Intelligence Partnership (which is fully supported by
the DCMS, and is discussed further below in the response to the Inquiry’s conclusion no. 21).
21. The current deﬁciencies in the provision of statistics are a major constraint on the potential
growth of the tourism industry. The ﬁndings of the Allnutt Review, which outlined many of these
deﬁciencies, drew wide support from the industry. Yet it is clear that its recommendations have
thus far been implemented only in a very limited and piecemeal fashion. There has therefore
been very little beneﬁt to the industry as a result. However, the Committee is encouraged by
the plans to develop a Tourism Intelligence Unit. We support the proposal for the Unit to
review the Allnutt recommendations, with a view to their development and implementation.
While this is a positive step, the Unit must receive adequate funding so that the limitations of
tourism statistics, that have been recognised for so long, can ﬁnally be addressed. We note that
no deﬁnite commitments have been made beyond setting up the Unit. It is of vital importance
to the industry that this should not be merely another false dawn. (Paragraph 155)
The DCMS is pleased that the Inquiry has recognised the work undertaken since 2004 to implement
the ﬁndings and recommendations of the Allnutt Report.
The Inquiry is aware of pressures in the wider funding environment for public sector tourism
support. Over recent years, national funding has been directed, in the main, to supporting marketing
and other support work. However, the DCMS has been active in work to implement the Allnutt
recommendations since 2004. This was initially through the Tourism Statistics Implementation
Planning Group, which the DCMS established and led over 2004-05 to prioritise the Allnutt
recommendations. The Planning Group, which included representatives from all of the Devolved
Administrations, clearly found that the two priority areas for improvement were:

13

s

the UK Tourism Survey, which is the primary data source for the domestic market at
national level; and

s

the establishment of a new Tourism Statistics Unit.

Both of these recommendations have now been implemented. The DCMS instructed VisitBritain
to re-tender the contract for the UK Tourism Survey in 2004-05, moving from a random telephone
sampling approach to a methodology involving face-to-face interviews as part of a wider consumer
survey. The new survey has been in operation since May 2005, and has produced much more robust
data on domestic tourism movements than the survey it replaced.
The Tourism Statistics Unit has been implemented as the English Tourism Intelligence Partnership,
which draws on the operational expertise of the Ofﬁce of National Statistics. It has already begun
its work under the impressive chairmanship of David Quarmby. The Partnership has an annual
budget of £300,000: £30,000 of this is from VisitBritain’s grant-in-aid from the DCMS, and the rest
from the Regional Development Agencies. This funding will be in place for an initial three years.
The DCMS participates fully in the work of the Partnership, and fully supports its work to improve
tourism data sources at national, regional and local levels.
22. We recognise that it is not always possible to provide sustainable travel options to tourist
attractions, particularly when the attractions are remote or do not attract large numbers of
visitors. However, where opportunities do exist, we encourage the public and private sectors
to work in partnership to reduce the reliance on the car and the pressure this places upon the
local environment. (Paragraph 160)
The Inquiry has recognised Natural England’s commitment and efforts since 2006 to raise awareness
of the effects of travel choices, and to develop more sustainable travel options (at paragraph 159).
The DCMS fully agrees that the effective promotion of sustainable transport options is a major
challenge for both the private and public sectors.
The proper assessment of the impact of tourism transport in the UK is one of the key challenges
included in the Sustainable Tourism Framework which is presently being developed by the DCMS.
Meeting this challenge will, among other things, require tourism planners and businesses to work
together to promote the use of more environmentally friendly forms of transport, the encouragement
of people to explore the attractions of their immediate vicinities rather than travelling further, the
provision of integrated transport links, and towards work to inﬂuence visitors’ choices and behaviour
through promotional material.
23. We are encouraged by the growing proﬁle of environmental issues in the tourism sector.
However, while signiﬁcant progress has been made in recent years, there is clearly still scope
for the industry to become more environmentally sustainable. The public is beginning to
demand a better performance from tourism businesses on “green” issues, and we encourage
the industry to respond to this demand. This will not only bring environmental beneﬁts but will
place businesses at a competitive advantage to those failing to meet the public’s environmental
expectations. (Paragraph 163)
The DCMS is pleased with the Inquiry’s recognition that signiﬁcant progress has been made in this
area over recent years, and agrees that that there is more to be done by both the public and private
sectors.
The Inquiry has recognised the success of the six Beacon Councils in promoting best practice
in sustainable tourism (paragraph 156), and of the new Visitor Attractions Code of Conduct on
sustainable practices (paragraph 161). The Inquiry should be aware that the Code of Conduct was
a cross-industry initiative which was fully supported by VisitBritain. Although the Association of
Leading Visitor Attractions was prominent amongst the organisations which agreed the terms of
the Code, the latter also beneﬁted from the involvement of the British Association of Leisure Parks,
Piers, and Attractions, the Historic Houses Association, and other bodies.
14

A growing number of organisations, including the Carbon Trust, exist to help businesses become
more environmentally aware. The DCMS has made it very clear to its industry partners that it
actively encourages better dialogue with such organisations, and that it fully supports accreditation
schemes such the Green Tourism Business Scheme and the David Bellamy Award Scheme.
24. There is little doubt that the Green Tourism Business Scheme has helped promote and
reward environmental sustainability in the tourism sector. However, we are convinced that some
modest changes would lead to both a greater uptake and a greater effectiveness. Signiﬁcant
beneﬁts can be realised from ensuring a closer alignment between the National Quality
Assurance Schemes and the Green Tourism Business Scheme. Environmental sustainability
should be included within the NQAS. The Government must also take a lead in rewarding
those accommodation providers that operate in a sustainable manner. We recommend that
sound environmental practice should be a pre-requisite for the acquisition of accommodation
contracts for the Government and its sponsored bodies. (Paragraph 167)
With the involvement of the DCMS, VisitBritain carried out a review of possible conﬂicts between
the encouragement of sustainable business practices, and existing criteria of the National Quality
Assessment Schemes (NQAS), in 2007. The review concluded that the overall aim should be to ensure
that broad sustainable principles – rather than simply environmental ones – should be embedded
in the NQAS. The achievement of that aim will be an ongoing process. As a ﬁrst step, this issue
has been included in a wider review of quality work which forms part of VisitBritain’s Framework
Review of public sector tourism support. The Review will report shortly, but VisitBritain has already
indicated that it will ensure that any new NQAS standards which are developed or reviewed will
include best sustainable practices. In addition, VisitBritain has produced best practice leaﬂets on
sustainable practices, and these are available to businesses and NQAS quality assessors.
The DCMS agrees that the Green Tourism Business Scheme (GTBS), along with other and similar
initiatives, has already played an important part in helping tourism businesses to address their
environmental responsibilities. The DCMS encourages businesses within the NQAS schemes to
consider participation in the GTBS and other green schemes. VisitBritain has launched the Green
Start Scheme, which helps accommodation and attractions businesses to adopt more sustainable
practices, and prepares them for membership of more formal accreditation schemes like the
GTBS.
It is important that recognition is given to the achievements of businesses which have successfully
adopted sustainable practices. The 2008 Enjoy England Awards, which are organised by VisitBritain,
showcased leading “green” tourism businesses which have worked towards having a positive impact
on local environments and communities.
The use of hotel and accommodation providers by Government Departments and the wider public
sector is discussed above in response to the Inquiry’s conclusion no. 14. The DCMS has worked
to ensure that the public sector makes use of NQAS-assessed accommodation providers wherever
possible, as best practice. As discussed above, active consideration is being given to the inclusion of
sustainable business practices among the NQAS criteria.
25. The Committee recognises that the introduction of Double British Summer Time does not
have universal support. However, there is a growing body of convincing evidence demonstrating
the beneﬁts of the proposal, not least in terms of energy savings, road safety and increased
tourism revenue. On the other hand, there are objections that different time zones within the
UK would not be feasible nor desirable. We call on the Government therefore to consult widely
on this matter to see if a consensus could be reached. (Paragraph 172)
As the Minister for Culture, Creative Industries and Tourism made clear in her evidence to the
Inquiry, she has discussed this issue in detail on a number of occasions with the visitor attractions
sector and with other parts of the tourism industry. Since submitting that evidence, the Minister

15

has raised the matter with the Minister for Employment Relations and Postal Affairs, and with the
Scottish Minister for Enterprise, Energy, and Tourism. Ofﬁcials in the DCMS have also discussed
the issue further with the British Association of Leisure Parks, Piers and Attractions.
The Inquiry recognises that the introduction of Double British Summer Time, or of other changes
designed to allow an additional hour of evening daylight, does not have universal support. This is
not surprising. Any change to the UK’s time zones would have widespread and signiﬁcant effects,
extending far wider than the tourism industry. In addition to the effects of any change on businesses,
there could be important effects on energy use, road safety, crime levels, and on people’s general
sense of wellbeing. The evidence in all of these areas is inconclusive and, in considering the matter,
the Government is mindful of the Portuguese experiment in moving time zones in the early 1990’s.
Portugal is at a lower latitude than the UK, so the results of its experiment must be treated with some
caution in any attempt to project the possible effects of any changes in the UK context. However, the
results of that experiment (and its eventual abandonment) are relevant, especially:

s
s
s

the negligible effect on levels of energy use;
the lack of any apparent effect on numbers of road accidents; and
the negative effects on children’s sleeping patterns.

The Government believes that further research in these areas is needed in the UK context, if a
compelling case is to be made for a full consultation (although the Government notes the research
published by Cambridge University in October 2007, and mentioned by the Inquiry at paragraph
169 of its report). This applies equally to tourism’s economic case for change. The widely-quoted
ﬁgure of £2 billion a year in economic beneﬁts for tourism, should a change be made to introduce
an additional hour of daylight in the summer, comes from research carried out in 1992. The DCMS
has discussed the need for more current ﬁgures with the tourism industry, along with the desirability
of robust projections of the (possibly very different) economic beneﬁts for tourism of changes to
summer time, and to winter time. The industry has recently indicated to the DCMS that it will look
at the case for commissioning such work.
The Inquiry has noted Visit Scotland’s opposition to any change (at paragraph 171). Wider Scottish
opposition has since been conﬁrmed by the Scottish Minister for Enterprise, Energy, and Tourism.
The Government’s position is that a single, national time zone for the whole of the UK remains
both necessary and desirable. However, the DCMS has made it clear to the tourism industry that it
will consider the case for a more detailed review (which could include a full consultation), if this is
justiﬁed by new evidence.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Ofﬁce Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce
ID5952165 10/08 411274 19585
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled ﬁbre content minimum.

16

9'0.7-*)>'=>! >!-*> 8&8.32*6=>++.(*>&2)>&:&.0&'0*>+631


## !##
! 
>3<>>36;.(-> >
*2*6&0>*259.6.*7> > > 
6)*6>8-639,->8-*>&60.&1*28&6=>380.2*>  > >
&<>36)*67> > >
1&.0>(97831*67*6:.(*7873(39/
!*<84-32*> > > 
 # 
 >68-96> 86**8>*0+&78>!> 
> > >&<>> > 
>38-.&2>3&)>).2'96,-> >%
 >  >
>&<> >  > 
# "#
>6.),*> 86**8>&60.&1*28> 59&6*
32)32> #>$


 ####

