DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response
to the Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee Report on Public
Service Content (HC 36-1)
Session 2007-08

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty

Cm 7309

£5.15

© Crown Copyright 2008
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be
reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged
as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to
The Licensing Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ.
Fax: 01603 723000 or e-mail: licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk

Government Response to the Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee Report on Public Service Content
(HC 36-1) Session 2007-08
Introduction
The Government welcomes the Committee’s First Report of the 2007-08 session, and is pleased
to be able to present its response to the Committee and outline how we intend to take action on
the recommendations made.
We thank the Committee for its thorough examination of public service media content in the UK.
While it is too early to respond in detail on some of the specific issues raised, the report makes
a number of interesting recommendations which will inform future considerations of public
service broadcasting.
Conclusions and Recommendations
●

(1) The purposes and characteristics approach put forward by Ofcom, though hard
to measure and assess, is a useful starting point for examining public service
content. We agree that a huge amount of currently available content meets these
purposes and characteristics, and that this content is available from the designated
public service broadcasters and from other providers including commercial
broadcasters who are not bound by public service obligations. Given this, we believe
that the fact that content exhibits public service purposes and characteristics as
defined by Ofcom is not, in itself, a sufficient condition for the Government to
considering intervening to provide this content. (Paragraph 23)

●

(4) We believe that the primary and most important factor for policymakers and
regulators to assess when looking at the provision of public service content is the
amount of content exhibiting public service purposes and characteristics, as defined
by Ofcom, available to consumers. However, we recognise that an assessment of the
number of public service content providers and their levels of public subsidy can
be a useful, but firmly secondary, way of looking at the issue. (Paragraph 47)

1.
The Government agrees that the framework we set out in the Communications Act 2003
and the characteristics and purposes put forward by Ofcom as part of their first public service
broadcasting review in 2005 provide a valuable starting point for examining public service content.
Whilst we remain committed to a strong future for public service broadcasting, we are also aware
that the current broadcasting environment is changing rapidly, bringing both pressures on the
current system and opportunities for new providers to step in and deliver some types of public
service content. That is why both Government and Ofcom are actively considering the future of
public service broadcasting in the UK.
2.
We have brought forward the timing of our wider review of funding for public service
broadcasting (PSB) beyond the BBC, to follow Ofcom’s second public service broadcasting
review. We are also considering these key issues within the wider context of convergence, as part
of the convergence think tank programme announced in the Autumn by the Secretary of State for
Culture, Media and Sport.
●

(2) There is currently an abundant supply of content that exhibits public service
purposes and characteristics as defined by Ofcom. There are more providers and
hours of this type of content available to consumers than ever before, including a
substantial provision from the radio and digital multi-channel sectors. We note,

1

however, the criticism that the digital multi-channel sector is not sufficiently
investing in UK – produced content. We welcome the declared intention of these
broadcasters to increase their investment in this area and believe that Ofcom should
conduct and publish a detailed analysis of the multi-channel sector’s level of
investment in UK produced content. (Paragraph 38)
3.
Like the Committee, the Government welcomes the stated intention of digital multi-channel
broadcasters to increase investment in UK produced content. We would expect Ofcom to examine
the prospects for investment in UK content by digital multi-channel broadcasters.
●

(3) Plurality in the provision of content is important, as it brings the benefits of
competition, different services and a diversity of viewpoints to consumers. We
consider that there is currently a plurality among providers, commissioners and
producers of public service content and we note and welcome the Government’s
commitment to plurality. Despite this commitment, it is the case that a large
proportion of the Government’s support for public service content has been
concentrated on one provider, the BBC. We believe that the Government and Ofcom
should set out what they consider to be a sufficient level of plurality, and the
investment necessary to achieve that, in order to assess whether this is likely to be
threatened in future. (Paragraph 42)

●

(10) The provision of public service content by the digital multi-channel sector has
increased plurality in UK broadcasting. The sector provides a range and diversity
of content that exhibits public service purposes and characteristics as defined by
Ofcom and this provision may very well increase after digital switchover as its
channels gain access to larger audiences and revenues. (Paragraph 75)

4.
The Government agrees with the Committee on the benefits of plurality in public service
broadcasting. It also agrees that some content displaying public service characteristics is available
from providers beyond those formally designated as public service broadcasters. The future
importance of plurality and how it can best be maintained in the digital age are key issues for
both Ofcom’s second review of public service broadcasting and for the Government review of
PSB funding.
●

(5) We recognise that the value of the indirect subsidy of analogue spectrum for
ITV, Channel 4 and Five, which granted exclusive access to mass audiences, will
diminish as the UK approaches digital switchover and we note the concerns that
ITV, Channel 4 and Five might therefore reduce their current provision of public
service content. On the other hand, we note that there will still be an (albeit smaller)
subsidy for the commercial public service broadcasters after digital switchover and
we believe that this, and broadcasters’ commercial interests, will sustain public
service content. We do, however, believe that it will be increasingly difficult to
continue to impose public service obligations on commercial broadcasters beyond
the value of this ongoing subsidy. The question, increasingly, will be what level of
obligation is sustainable. (Paragraph 53)

5.
We recognise the pressures affecting these broadcasters, in particular through take-up of
multichannel digital television and the expansion of other media. The question of sustainable
obligations will, therefore, be an important aspect of Ofcom’s current public service broadcasting
review and the Government work already mentioned.
●

2

(6) The BBC currently provides a wide range of public service content across many
genres and plays an important role in setting quality standards for the rest of the
broadcasting market. We expect the BBC to continue to provide quality
programming and to set standards for other broadcasters in future given its
guaranteed income of over £3.2 billion per annum. (Paragraph 57)

6.
The Government fully endorses the Committee’s view. The importance of the BBC’s role
as a provider of quality programming and a standard-setter for other broadcasters was a key theme
throughout Charter review. That role is now firmly embodied in the new Charter and Agreement.
There is, for example, a requirement that the content of the Corporation’s UK Public Services
taken as a whole must be high quality, challenging, original, innovative and engaging.
●

(7) We note that some argue that the BBC should provide more commercially
orientated programming in order to reach a wide range of audiences. However, we
do not share this view and instead believe that the BBC should place a high priority
on areas that other broadcasters will not provide, while continuing to offer high
quality programming which attracts diverse audiences. Given the substantial
provision of public service content by other broadcasters, we believe that the BBC
could deliver its public service remit without providing all of its current range of
services and we note and welcome the BBC’s commitment to become smaller in
terms of its scale as an organisation and in its operations. We do not believe,
however, it is in the public interest for the BBC to be allowed to wither, as some
would like, for example, to become akin to the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)
in the US. (Paragraph 63)

7.
The Government notes the Committee’s comments. The decision that the BBC should be
granted a new 10-year Charter was based on the firm view that the Corporation should continue
as a publicly-funded public service broadcaster of real scale, with a responsibility to deliver a
range of services across a variety of platforms. The content of the BBC’s services must be
distinctive as compared with what is available from other broadcasters and must encompass both
mainstream and specialist programming. Although it is entirely legitimate and necessary for the
BBC to provide programmes aimed at a wide audience, it should achieve those audiences through
the inherent qualities of its content. Where the BBC does provide genres already available in the
market, its content should stand out clearly as the BBC’s.
●

(8) While we recognise the concerns that the BBC received a lower licence fee
settlement than desired, we believe that the BBC can continue its role in providing
high quality programming within the resources available to it and we welcome the
BBC’s plans to become a smaller but more distinctive organisation. However, the
increase in market provision of public service content suggests to us that further
analysis needs to be undertaken to assess the level of public funding that needs to
be made available for public service content. On current trends, we would expect
that the case for current levels of public funding will diminish. The BBC has rightly
reacted to the arrival of new channels by drawing back from programming that
can be broadcast by others. We welcome the BBC’s approach, and encourage the
BBC Trust to limit the BBC’s activities in areas where there is already alternative
provision. The BBC Trust should not treat licence fee income as a sum that must
necessarily be spent in its entirety, irrespective of others’ provision of public service
content, and we encourage it to bear in mind its option of not drawing down the
full amount of the licence fee in future. (Paragraph 68)

8.
The Government is clear that the current licence fee settlement provides a fair and realistic
funding base which will allow the BBC to secure the effective promotion of its Public Purposes.
How the BBC allocates its resources in order to secure the effective promotion of the Public
Purposes is, however, a matter for the BBC Trust. We note the Trust’s view, when referring to
the Executive’s six-year strategy announced in October, that “at the heart of the strategic plan
remains a firm commitment to the delivery of the BBC’s public purposes through high quality
and distinctive creative content”. The Trust has further said that the strategy “will safeguard the
core values of the BBC at a time of radical and accelerating change in technology, markets and
audience expectations”.

3

9.
The Government is committed to funding the BBC by the licence fee for the whole of the
current Charter period. However, the Trust is under a specific duty to keep the BBC’s financial
needs under review and retains the option of not drawing down the full amount of the licence
fee where the Trust considers this to be in the public interest. The Government agrees that the
overall level of public intervention needed to support the provision of public service content in
the future is an issue for detailed analysis and debate. This is why we remain firmly committed
to the review of funding already referred to.
●

(9) We are encouraged by S4C’s optimism about its ability to provide public service
content in the future. S4C demonstrates that a broadcaster with direct public
funding and a tightly defined remit can deliver public service content without
having its editorial independence compromised. (Paragraph 72)

10. The Government welcomes S4C’s optimism about its ability to continue to provide public
service content in the future. We note the Committee’s conclusion that the S4C example
demonstrates that direct public funding and a tightly defined remit can deliver public service
content without compromising a broadcaster’s editorial independence.
●

11.

4

(11) We find the failure by the Satellite and Cable broadcasters’ Group to release
information on their members’ investment UK-produced children’s programming
very disappointing. In evidence, this body has been one of the most optimistic about
the prospects for market-provided public service content in the digital age, but its
failure to provide these statistics could be taken as undermining that confidence
(Paragraph 76)

The Government notes the Committee’s observations.
●

(12) British children in multichannel homes have access to more children’s
television than ever before. This content is provided by a range of broadcasters,
from the designated public service broadcasters to the digital multi-channels.
Children are increasingly consuming content on platforms other than traditional
mixed genre television channels. We are therefore not unduly concerned if public
service broadcasters shift their children’s programming focus away from their main
terrestrial channels, instead providing content on dedicated children’s channels. We
do, however, believe that before the completion of digital switchover, it will still be
important for the public service broadcasters to provide some UK-produced
children’s programming on their main terrestrial channels, and after the completion
of digital switchover, for the public service broadcasters to provide UK-produced
children’s programming free-to-air. (Paragraph 83)

●

(14) We believe that a mix of imported and UK produced content is beneficial for
UK children as both types of programming can help children learn and develop,
and we believe that UK-produced content plays an important role in maintaining
children’s cultural identity. We note the commitment to children’s programming of
the BBC, ITV, Five and some digital multi channels and we encourage these
broadcasters to continue to contribute to the production of UK-originated output.
Despite these commitments, we believe that the financial pressure likely to face the
main current commercial commissioners of children’s content, in part due to the
Government and Ofcom’s interventions which will restrict advertising revenue for
children’s programming, creates uncertainty about the level of UK produced
children’s content that will be attained in future. We believe that it is important
that there remains a significant amount of UK-produced children’s programming
on commercial channels as well as the BBC, and we would be very disappointed if
ITV further reduced or withdrew from commissioning UK children’s content in the
future. We therefore recommend that the Government and Ofcom should identify
how much UK children’s production they consider is necessary and come to a view

on whether they believe there will be a shortfall. We welcome Ofcom’s recent
discussion paper on the future of children’s programming as a good first step in
this process. If a shortfall is envisaged, we believe that children’s programming
should be eligible for assistance as we set out later. (Paragraph 86)
12. The Government acknowledges that children’s television programming is a much valued
and important part of the UK’s broadcasting environment, with a significant contribution from
public service television.
13. We have already engaged with the industry on this issue. In April of last year DCMS
organised a seminar, in conjunction with BAFTA, in order to examine the future of children’s
programming in the UK. We welcome the Committee’s consideration of this issue in the context
of its PSB review. We have also brought forward the timing of our wider review of funding for
public service broadcasting beyond the BBC, to begin once Ofcom’s conclusions emerge. Also,
in addition Ofcom, in advance of their second PSB review, announced on 13 February 2007, that
they were going to look at the future of children’s TV programming in the UK. Their discussion
paper “The Future of Children’s Television in the UK” was published on 3 October 2007 and the
closing date for the responses was 20 December. Ofcom’s findings and any recommendations
will be published in the first phase of the PSB review, due in the Spring of this year.
14. The issues will also feed into our work on the implications of convergence, which is
particularly important given that older children and younger teenagers are watching less television
and using the internet and mobile phones more than ever. All the work streams mentioned will
ensure that we can take full account of the changing context of television when considering the
future place of UK-produced children’s programming.
●

(13) While we agree with the policy objective of reducing childhood obesity, it is
the case that restrictions on the advertising of food and drink products high in fat,
salt and sugar have increased the financial pressure on broadcasters of children’s
programming and that they will have an adverse effect on the provision of original,
UK-produced children’s content. (Paragraph 84)

15. The Government has made clear its commitment to halt the rise in childhood obesity and
to supporting parents in protecting their children from encouragement to eat too many HFSS
foods. The 2004 Public Health White Paper set out a comprehensive approach to promote a healthy
diet and reduce children’s obesity levels – including changing the nature and balance of food
promotion to children across all media.
16. We welcome the steps Ofcom have taken to strengthen the regulation of broadcast food
promotion to children – with further restrictions on food advertising in programmes of appeal to
children under 16 due to come into effect in 2008. Ofcom’s new rules will significantly reduce
children’s exposure to HFSS advertising, whilst continuing to allow advertisements for non-HFSS
food.
17. Whilst Government accepts that these restrictions will have an economic impact on
broadcasters, it believes that Ofcom’s new rules are a proportionate and balanced contribution to
the wider range of measures aimed at tackling childhood obesity and poor diet. However, we will
be evaluating fully the impact of the new rules on food promotion before any further measures
are considered. As such, we will shortly be publishing a stock take report on the changes to HFSS
advertising, in both broadcast and non-broadcast media – with a full review in 2008 and Ofcom
will be undertaking a full review of the rule changes over the next year.

5

●

(15) On the basis of the evidence, it is our judgement that there is no near or midterm crisis in the provision of network television news. In the longer term, while
we note the arguments that high quality news is relatively expensive to make, we
believe that, on balance, the commercial public service broadcasters are likely to
provide national news in the future as it is regarded as essential for their brands,
but the importance of maintaining plurality in high quality news provision is such
that we should remain vigilant in case this does not occur. (Paragraph 94)

●

(17) An increasing amount of news content is provided by commercial broadcasters
and other providers, and we note the concerns that this content may be of lower
quality and may be less independent and impartial than content provided by the
designated public service broadcasters. We are not unduly concerned, however, if
news coverage from non public service broadcasters is presented from a particular
viewpoint, as long as this is made clear to the viewer: we believe that it is more
important for there to be a balanced range of views and opinions from news
providers across the media spectrum. News provision from other organisations,
especially on new media, has an important role in maintaining the plurality and
diversity of news output in the UK. We recognise in the age of broadcast by
broadband that it is neither possible, nor necessarily desirable, to subject every such
operator to impartiality rules. We do believe, however, that the impartiality
requirements currently applied to public service broadcasters have served the UK
well and policy-makers again need to keep a watching brief as the industry develops
in the digital age. (Paragraph 101)

●

(18) We note the concerns about the future viability of regional programming and
we recognise that regional programming is relatively costly to produce as it cannot
generate the mass audiences and revenues of national programming. While we note
that it is in the interests of broadcasters to provide regional content, as this type of
content is attractive to viewers, we believe that content specific to the nations and
regions, especially news programming, may come under pressure in future. We also
recognise the concern in some distinct areas such as the South West and the Border
region about the impact that ITV’s proposals will have on relevant local news
provision. We therefore believe that the Government and Ofcom should identify how
much regional material they believe should be provided, and come to a view on
whether they believe there will be a shortfall in future. If a shortfall is envisaged
we believe that regional programming should be eligible for assistance as we set out
later. In the interests of plurality it would be regrettable if regional news in any
area were to become solely the preserve of the BBC. (Paragraph 107)

18. The Government strongly supports independence and impartiality in the broadcast media.
That is why we carried forward the statutory impartiality obligations into the Communications
Act and have similar requirements on the BBC, through its Charter and Agreement. Impartiality
remains at the heart of licensed broadcasting services, as it guarantees the availability of accurate
and impartial news services and political impartiality in programme making. It also ensures that
the broadcast media provide a counter-weight to other, often partial, sources of news and,
therefore, contribute significantly to a properly informed democratic debate.
19. The Government also accepts that whilst the provision of national news is regarded as
essential for commercial public service broadcasters’ brands and therefore is likely to be provided
after digital switchover, its provision should not be taken for granted as we move towards digital
switchover and beyond, a view that was also set out in Ofcom’s discussion paper ‘New News,
Future News’. That is why we welcomed the publication of that discussion paper, as a stimulus
to debate around news provision. The views received by Ofcom will be reflected in their current
public service broadcasting review.

6

20. Government is also committed to retaining a strong regional dimension to public service
broadcasting, reflecting UK cultural traditions and meeting the needs of diverse communities. We
believe that the Communications Act ensures this, for example by providing important safeguards
for quality regional programme-making and regional programming. In Phase 3 of its review into
Public Service Broadcasting, published in February 2005, Ofcom found ITV’s regional news
highly valued by audiences and, therefore, maintained its obligations for regional news. However,
Ofcom reduced non-news obligations as they were seen as unsustainable and appeared to be less
valued by audiences.
21. With regard to ITV’s regional news proposals, it is not for Government to direct ITV in
this area. These decisions are for Ofcom to make, subject to Communications Act duties, and
regional news remains a core part of ITV’s public service remit. Ofcom will need to consider
very carefully whether these proposals sustain the regional relationships with their audiences,
which have been the traditional strength of ITV. Further discussions will take place in the coming
months as Ofcom conducts its next review of public service television. This will give all interested
parties the opportunity to comment before any decisions are made. We also note ITV’s
commitment to engage with MPs and councillors on this issue in order to explain the proposal.
●

(16) In the digital age, we believe policy-makers should keep a watching brief on
the provision of current affairs and investigative programming and if there is a
shortfall, this genre might also be eligible for assistance as set out later. (Paragraph
95)

●

(19) We note the enthusiasm of some witnesses for the potential for local television
and the view that the Government needs to take action to support the provision of
local content. However, while we do see some value in local content, we are not
convinced of the need to intervene to support local television, particularly by giving
away spectrum for broadcasting on digital terrestrial television. If providers want
to offer local television services, we believe that more targeted delivery platforms,
such as broadband, are more appropriate. (Paragraph 117)

22. The Government is committed to ensuring provision of current affairs programming on PSB
channels. The Communications Act 2003 requires these channels to provide ‘a range of high
quality and diverse programming’ and commits them to programming quotas including the
provision of current affairs programmes. However, responsibility for monitoring these quotas falls
to Ofcom and, like other PSB commitments, these will be looked at as part of Ofcom’s second
PSB review which is currently under way.
23. Local television services can play a valuable role in bringing communities together through
providing local news and information on local issues and services and can also bring economic
benefits to communities in terms of providing employment and training in media skills. We are
working with Ofcom to ensure there are opportunities for different kinds of local and community
services to be delivered across a range of platforms including broadband and digital terrestrial
television.
24. The Government has a clear policy of using market mechanisms to allocate spectrum, as
that is the best way of identifying the most valuable uses to which spectrum can be put. The
threshold for any exceptions to this approach is extremely high. We welcome Ofcom’s decisions
set out in its Digital Dividend Review statement to package interleaved spectrum in a way which
makes it suitable, but is not exclusively reserved, for local and community broadcasting on digital
terrestrial television. Ofcom considers that such packaging will address the risk of co-ordination
market failure identified for local and community TV.

7

25. Ofcom has announced they will consult on the details of spectrum packaging and award
notably in the interleaved spectrum in spring 2008. We look forward to hearing stakeholders’
views on this issue.
●

(20) A huge amount of content exhibiting public service purposes and
characteristics, as defined by Ofcom, is currently available on new media and
there is a plurality of providers of this content. We believe that there is clearly no
threat to the production or distribution of public service content on new media
platforms. While we note the efforts by the designated public service broadcasters
to make their content available on new media, we believe that material provided by
smaller, newer entrants can also meet public service purposes and characteristics
as defined by Ofcom. We do not accept the arguments that the Government needs
to assist new media start ups to achieve scale and we therefore consider that there
is no need for further intervention to support public service content on new media.
(Paragraph 124)

●

(21) Given the huge amount of public service content currently available on new
media, we believe that the creation of a new public service publisher, as currently
envisaged by Ofcom, is unnecessary. The creation of a new public service content
institution for new media would run the risk of distorting the market and impeding
innovation. We also believe that an approach that attempts to impose the
institutional interventions of the past in the new media world is misguided. At a
time when technological change and digital uptake strengthens the case for the
withdrawal of existing intervention, the introduction of new public institutions does
not appear to be merited. (Paragraph 132)

26. The Government notes the Committee’s views in this area. The Government believes,
however, that the rapid changes in the way programme content is delivered and viewed poses
both challenges and opportunities and that the issues merit further consideration. That is why the
Secretary of State announced Government plans for the Convergence Think Tank in his RTS
speech on 13 September last year. The role of the Think Tank will be to draw together the available
evidence and inform Government policy in this area. Our three key themes, looking to the future,
will be open markets, universal access to high quality programming and empowering consumers.

8

●

(22) Competition between providers has provided consumers with a range and
diversity of content. We believe that in future, competition—not least with, and
from, the BBC—will drive the provision of quality content for consumers, although
there are already evident areas of concern. The most appropriate way for the
Government and Ofcom to encourage the beneficial effects of competition is not to
employ a heavy handed approach to regulation. They should ensure the minimum
amount of public intervention that is necessary to meet policy objectives with
respect to the continuing availability of public service content in all its forms.
(Paragraph 135)

●

(23) We believe that the Government and Ofcom should only consider intervening
in the broadcasting market where it appears that certain types of content would
not be provided or underprovided. Given that the market currently provides a
wealth of content exhibiting public service purposes and characteristics as defined
by Ofcom and is likely to continue this provision in the future, we believe that the
level of Government and regulatory intervention should diminish as we enter the
digital age. In order to be clear about policy objectives, we consider that the
Government and Ofcom should specify the socially valuable programming genres
or areas which they believe should be sustained, and undertake a detailed, robust
analysis of the amount of this content that is likely to be provided after digital
switchover in order to identify where, if anywhere, there is likely to be a shortfall.

We have already suggested children’s programming and regional programming as
two areas that merit examination. If the Government and Ofcom wish to intervene
in areas where the market can provide, it is our view that they should explain why.
More broadly, the Government and Ofcom should ensure that any decision to
intervene is evidence based, that the intended policy outcome is clear and
measurable, and that the costs of intervention are transparent to consumers.
(Paragraph 141)
●

(24) We note that the Government has committed itself to reviewing the case for
making available public funds, including licence fee income, beyond the BBC and
we welcome the Government’s commitment to bring forward the timing of this
review. We foresee that the BBC will remain the main provider of public service
programming in the future and will continue to receive by far the largest share of
the public funds available. However, we believe that public funding, should be made
available beyond the BBC, on a contestable basis, to sustain plurality and to bring
the benefits of competition to the provision of public service content that the market
would not provide. We do not necessarily accept the arguments against the
redistribution of public funding: redistribution might increase accountability and
transparency and could lead to a greater provision of public service content.
However, the body allocating public funding would need to take care not to fund
programming that is already commercially viable. (Paragraph 154)

●

(25) We believe that the most appropriate source of public funds for public service
content is either from the licence fee or from general taxation, although we do not
believe that the overall cost to the public should be allowed to increase.
(Paragraph 155)

27. The Government agrees that the BBC will remain the main provider of public service
programming in the future and has made clear that the TV licence fee will remain the main
mechanism for funding the Corporation at least until the end of its current Charter. The
Government has also made clear that the case for public service broadcasting is not simply one
of market failure. The case for any wider distribution of public funds beyond the BBC will be
considered by the Government review in the light of the conclusions of Ofcom’s current review
and the work of the Convergence Think Tank.
●

(26) Channel 4 is currently profitable and has been performing well compared to
other terrestrial broadcasters. We note, however, that Ofcom believes Channel 4 is
likely to face financial difficulties in the medium term. After digital switchover,
should Channel 4’s residual subsidy be insufficient to provide public service content
that the market would otherwise not provide, we believe that Channel 4 should be
able to apply, on a contestable basis, for public funding—which could potentially
include television licence fee income—to make specific public service programmes
that meet its remit. (Paragraph 161)

28. We note the Committee’s recommendation that Channel 4 should be able to apply for public
funding, on a contestable basis, for specific public service programmes that meet its remit. We
shall take the Committee’s views into account in our considerations.
●

(27) We believe that Channel 4’s remit is inappropriate in the digital age and
that it needs to be more tightly tied to the provision of content that the market
would be unlikely to provide, such as high quality, challenging UK-produced drama
and documentaries of the kind that used to be synonymous with the channel.
A more tightly defined remit would help the body considering applications for
public funding judge whether to allocate money to Channel 4 and would also more
clearly justify the expenditure of public money on supporting the channel. Of

9

course, Channel 4 would still be able to produce commercial programming to
cross-subsidise the provision of content that the market would not provide.
(Paragraph 165)
29. The Government does not believe that, at present, there is a clear case for the amendment
of Channel 4’s public service remit. Since its launch, Channel 4 has had a broadly defined remit
with an emphasis on innovation, experimentation and creativity. To restrict the remit to
programming that the market would not otherwise provide would, we believe, risk undermining
the dynamism that has enabled Channel 4 to make such a valuable contribution to UK
broadcasting. However, we recognise that there have been legitimate concerns about how Channel
4’s delivery of its remit is measured. The Government therefore welcomes the commitment by
the Channel 4 Board, last June, to put in place a new framework for measuring, and publicly
accounting for, the Channel’s PSB performance. We look forward to the implementation of these
proposals.
●

(28) We welcome the OFT’s decision to hold a review of the Contract Rights
Renewal (CRR) mechanism. The advertising market has changed dramatically since
the CRR mechanism was imposed and we believe there is a strong case for relaxing
or possibly removing this remedy. We note, however, that ITV is still likely to have
a high market share and consider that it is likely that there will still need to be
some intervention. (Paragraph 171)

30. The Contracts Right Renewal remedy is a matter for the Competition Authorities to consider
and we await their recommendations.
●

(29) Given the concerns about the future provision of some genres of public service
content, we reiterate our recommendation from our Report on New Media and
Creative Industries that commercial broadcasters should be permitted to introduce
product placement within the boundaries set by the new EU Audio Visual Media
Services Directive. (Paragraph 175)

31. The Audiovisual Media Services Directive was formally adopted by the European
Parliament on 29 November 2007 and came into force on 19 December 2007. The Directive will
enable the Government to allow UK broadcasters to include product placement in certain genres
of programming made or commissioned by them, but it does not require us to do so. We are
currently considering how to implement the Directive in the UK. As the Committee notes in its
report, Ofcom’s consultation on product placement produced varied responses with no clear
consensus. We will want to consult widely with stakeholders before reaching any decision on
whether product placement should be permitted.
●

(30) We recognise the substantial provision of public service content from the radio
sector, including commercial radio. We sympathise with the concerns of commercial
radio that the BBC is over dominant with a 55% share of total listening and that
the sector is too heavily regulated relative to its size. Ofcom proposes to reform the
regulation of commercial radio and we encourage it to be as radical and as speedy
as possible in removing requirements that are unnecessary given the impact of
regulation on the commercial sector’s current and likely future provision of public
service content. (Paragraph 181)

32. The Government believes in the importance of a strong and vibrant commercial radio
industry. Ofcom’s report “The Future of Radio – The Next Phase” published on 22 November
contains a number of recommendations, some of which would require legislation. We welcome
these recommendations and are considering the next steps. Some of the recommendations are for
Ofcom themselves to consider and take forward, including many of those in respect of the reform
of local commercial radio.

10

●

(31) If the Government decides that additional forms of support are needed for
public service content, we believe that this support should be provided using direct,
accountable subsidies. On balance, we believe that the benefits of direct funding
outweigh any risks to broadcasting independence. In particular, we believe that the
Government and Ofcom should not interfere further with the spectrum market to
pursue broadcasting policy, for example by allocating additional spectrum to
support the provision of public service content. (Paragraph 189)

33. The Government agrees that market mechanisms, rather than intervention, should be used to
allocate spectrum. The threshold for any exception to this approach is extremely high.
34. With regard to specific funding arrangements for the provision of public service content,
it is too early at present to speculate on what recommendations might arise from either the Ofcom
or the Government review (or indeed any work carried out by the recently-formed Convergence
Think Tank) in terms of providing additional forms of support for public service content, but we
will take the Committee’s views into account in our considerations.
●

(32) We support Ofcom’s decision to introduce Administered Incentive Pricing for
spectrum used for broadcasting. We note that broadcasters have benefited from a
long immunity from paying for the spectrum they use and that the introduction of
Administered Incentive Pricing will merely bring broadcasters into line with other
users of the spectrum, such as the Ministry of Defence. (Paragraph 192)

35. Ofcom has decided that from 2014 broadcasters will be charged Administered Incentive
Pricing (AIP) for their use of spectrum for terrestrial broadcasting, but potential effects on
broadcasting output will be taken into account so as to ensure that public service requirements
can continue to be met.
36. Ofcom has decided that from 2014 broadcasters will be charged Administered Incentive
Pricing (AIP) for their use of spectrum for terrestrial broadcasting.
37. This is in line with Government’s views that AIP is a tool which should be applied to all
broadcasters in order to promote the most efficient use of spectrum. However, any introduction
of AIP should balance the value of the spectrum used with the ability of the broadcasters to meet
their public service obligations. It should also take into account the scope to make more efficient
use of the spectrum.
38.

Ofcom will start working on setting prices for spectrum nearer the time of implementation.
●

(33) We reiterate our support for Ofcom’s technology neutral approach to
auctioning the spectrum released by digital switchover. We have continued to listen
to the arguments but we fail to see how transmission of extra high definition digital
terrestrial television channels delivers sufficient extra public value to justify
intervention. In any case, we note that Ofcom and the public service broadcasters
have agreed in principle that it is technically possible to transmit up to four channels
in high definition within their current allocation of spectrum. We agree that the
most appropriate use of the vacated spectrum is best determined by market
mechanisms and note that this will still allow the broadcasters the option of
purchasing additional spectrum in the marketplace. (Paragraph 197)

39. The Government welcomes the Committee’s support for Ofcom’s market-based approach
to spectrum management, and in particular the regulator’s proposals for awarding the digital
dividend spectrum released by switchover. We too have a clear commitment to the use of market
mechanisms to allocate spectrum, as this is the best way of identifying the most valuable use to
which that spectrum can be put. The threshold for any exception to this approach is extremely
high.

11

40. Since the publication of the Select Committee’s report, Ofcom has issued its consultation
‘The Future of Digital Terrestrial Television: Enabling new services for viewers’, which sets out
proposals for upgrading the existing DTT platform, using new technologies to free up capacity
for new services. We welcome this consultation and note that the PSB’s have put forward a joint
proposal for achieving the provision of high definition PSB services on existing capacity. We
look forward to the outcome of those discussions.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID5731123 01/08 388141
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

12

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

