DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response
to the Culture, Media and
Sport Committee Reports on the
Draft Heritage Protection Bill and
Draft Cultural Property
(Armed Conﬂicts) Bill

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2008

Cm 7472

£9.50

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response
to the Culture, Media and
Sport Committee Reports on the
Draft Heritage Protection Bill and
Draft Cultural Property
(Armed Conﬂicts) Bill

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2008

Cm 7472

£9.50

© Crown Copyright 2008
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or
agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing
it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be
acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document speciﬁed.
Where we have identiﬁed any third party copyright material you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please write to Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information,
Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or e-mail: licensing@
opsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 978 0 10 174722 6

Government Response to the Culture, Media and Sport
Committee Reports on the Draft Heritage Protection Bill
and Draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill
Contents
1.

Executive Summary

2.

Introduction

3.

Draft Heritage Protection Bill: Response to recommendations of the Committee and Public
Consultation

4.

Draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill: Response to recommendations of the
Committee and Public Consultation

5.

Annexes:
A: List of respondents to consultation on draft Heritage Protection Bill
B: List of respondents to consultation on draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill
C: List of respondents to consultation on Conservation Area clauses

1

2

Chapter One: Executive Summary
Overview
1.
This year the Government published a draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill
(January 2008) and a draft Heritage Protection Bill (April 2008) for pre-legislative scrutiny and
public consultation. This document sets out how the UK Government intends to take forward the
measures set out in those two draft Bills, in light of the issues raised in the public consultation and
the recommendations that emerged from pre-legislative scrutiny conducted by the Culture, Media
and Sport Committee.
Context
2.
The draft Heritage Protection Bill sets out in legislation the proposals ﬁrst published in
the Heritage Protection White Paper – Heritage Protection for the 21st Century – which were
widely welcomed. The draft Heritage Protection Bill, which covers England and Wales, sets out
a framework to unify heritage protection regimes, allow greater public involvement in decisionmaking and place heritage at the heart of the planning system, thereby making the system more
transparent and making heritage protection easier to understand and manage. The draft Cultural
Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill is designed to allow the UK to ratify the 1954 Hague Convention
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conﬂict and accede to its two
protocols (1954 and 1999).
Pre-legislative scrutiny and the public consultation
3.
Pre-legislative scrutiny of both draft Bills was completed by the Culture, Media and Sport
(CMS) Select Committee. The Committee received written evidence from 68 respondents and made 11
recommendations to the Government in relation to the draft Heritage Protection Bill. The Committee
received written evidence from 9 respondents and made 13 comments and recommendations to the
Government in relation to the draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill.
4.
DCMS also conducted a parallel public consultation on both draft Bills via its website. The
draft Heritage Protection Bill generated 100 written responses from individuals and organisations
sent directly to the Department, some of which duplicated responses sent to the CMS Committee,
or expanded upon separate responses to the Committee. Similarly, the draft Cultural Property
(Armed Conﬂicts) Bill generated 5 written responses from individuals and organisations, which
were largely duplicated in written evidence sent to the CMS Committee.
5.
The overwhelming majority of the responses to the Committee and the Department welcomed
both the draft Heritage Protection Bill and the draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill and
looked forward to their introduction to Parliament.
6.
This document sets out the Government’s response to each of the Committee’s
recommendations on both the draft Heritage Protection Bill and the draft Cultural Property
(Armed Conﬂicts) Bill. It does not contain either an analysis of, or a response to, each individual
point made via the public consultation. Instead it sets out those points arising from the public
consultation which we propose to take forward through amendments to the draft Bills, which have
not already been addressed in the response to the Committee’s recommendations.
Next Steps
7.
The Government published a green paper on 14 May 2008 which detailed the draft legislative
programme for the next session, 2008-09. The Heritage Protection Bill, incorporating the provisions
of the Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill, was included in this draft legislative programme.
Government will continue with its plans to introduce a Heritage Protection Bill, subject to the
availability of Parliamentary time.

3

Chapter Two: Introduction
Heritage Protection Bill
8.
The draft Heritage Protection Bill was published on 2 April 2008. This was a major step
towards the legislative reform needed to bring about the changes to the heritage protection system
that were put forward in the White Paper Heritage Protection for the 21st Century, published
in March 2007. The White Paper followed years of consultation and dialogue with a range of
stakeholders, going back to English Heritage’s review of all policies relating to the historic
environment, Power of Place (2000) and Government’s response, A Force for Our Future (2001).
9.

The draft Heritage Protection Bill contained provisions to:

s

s

s

s

Develop a uniﬁed approach to the historic environment that will be easy to understand
and to use, by:
❍

introducing a single registration (or designation) regime to replace listing, scheduling
and registering;

❍

devolving responsibility for the registration of land-based heritage assets in England
from the Secretary of State to English Heritage;

Maximise opportunities for inclusion and involvement by engaging the public in
decisions on protection, through:
❍

a new publicly accessible Heritage Register for England and for Wales;

❍

new consultation and appeal processes and interim protection for land-based historic
assets;

Deliver sustainable communities by putting the historic environment at the heart of
an effective planning system, through:
❍

merging Listed Building Consent and Scheduled Monument Consent into a single
Heritage Asset Consent, and merging Conservation Area Consent with planning
permission;

❍

introducing greater ﬂexibility into the system through a new statutory framework for
voluntary management agreements;

Increase capacity at local level to deliver these reforms, by
❍

s

improving access to information about the historic environment by introducing a
statutory duty for local authorities to maintain or have access to Historic Environment
Records;

Improve the system of marine heritage protection, by:
❍

broadening the range of marine heritage assets that can be protected;

❍

improving information sharing on marine heritage assets;

❍

introducing interim protection for marine heritage sites;

❍

making the consent system more ﬂexible, including an appeal system for marine
licensing decisions.

10. Following the consultation on the draft Bill, it was evident that there was broad support
from the sector for the new heritage protection framework set out in the draft Heritage Protection
Bill, with particular emphasis on the value of unifying the system, providing for Heritage
Partnership Agreements, and the new statutory duty on local authorities to maintain or have
access to HERs.

4

Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill
11. The draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill was published on 7 January 2008 and
represents a major milestone on the path towards ratiﬁcation of the 1954 Hague Convention. The
draft legislation takes into account the responses to the public consultation on implementation of
the Hague Convention launched on 6 September 2005.
12. The draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill contained provisions to enable the UK
government to ratify the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conﬂict (the Hague Convention), which will, in turn:
s protect the nation’s most important cultural property from damage in the event of armed
conﬂict;
s send a signal to the international community that the UK takes seriously its obligations
under international humanitarian law to respect and safeguard the cultural property of
other nations during times of armed conﬂict.
Pre-legislative scrutiny
13. The Culture, Media and Sport Committee conducted separate investigations into the draft
Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) and Heritage Protection Bills but, being aware that it was
Government’s intention to join these two draft Bills with the aim of introducing a single Bill in
the Fourth Session, the Minister’s oral hearing on the Heritage Protection Bill involved taking
questions on the Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill.
14. The Culture, Media and Sport Committee announced its inquiry into the draft Heritage
Protection Bill on 1 May 2008, inviting evidence on:
s the overall aims and scope of the draft Bill;
s the estimates of costs and beneﬁts set out in the Impact Assessment published alongside
the draft Bill; and
s the stafﬁng and skill levels needed for effective implementation of the provisions in the
draft Bill.
15. The Committee received nearly seventy written submissions, and it held two oral evidence
sessions, the ﬁrst of which took evidence from representatives of local government interests, the
historic environment sector and those responsible for managing heritage assets on a day-to-day
basis, and the second of which involved the Minister for Culture, the Rt Hon Margaret Hodge, and
Dr Simon Thurley, Chief Executive of English Heritage. The Committee published its report on
the draft Heritage Protection Bill and accompanying Impact Assessment on 30 July 2008.
16. The Culture, Media and Sport Committee announced its inquiry into the draft Cultural
Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill on 31 January 2008, the terms of reference of which were to seek
views on the overall aims of the draft Bill and on whether the Bill was structured and drafted in a
way which enabled those aims to be met. It received written evidence from 9 respondents and held
a single oral evidence session, on 10 June 2008. The Committee published its report on the draft
Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill on 22 July 2008.
17. The Government is grateful to the CMS Committee, its members and those who provided
evidence for their efforts and contribution to both draft Bills. We are pleased the Committee was
supportive in principle of the draft Heritage Protection Bill, and welcome their endorsement of
Government’s vision of the new legislation and its aim to reform, modernise, and streamline the
present heritage protection system.
18. The Government is also grateful to the Committee for taking the unusual step of publishing its
report on the Heritage Protection Bill during Summer Recess, as this has allowed the Committee’s
comments and recommendations to be taken on board while work on the Bill continued over the
Summer.

5

19. Our response to each of the recommendations on both draft Bills is set out in the following
chapters of this report.
Public Consultation
20. In addition to the Select Committee’s call for written evidence following the publication of
both draft Bills, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport also invited comments in a parallel
consultation exercise. One hundred further responses were received by the Department on the
draft Heritage Protection Bill, a further ﬁve on the draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts)
Bill, and twenty-eight on the draft Conservation Area clauses, and we would like to thank all the
organisations, sectors and individuals who took time to submit responses to the consultation. A
similar consultation on the draft Heritage Protection Bill was carried out in Wales by the Welsh
Assembly Government. This report does not contain either an analysis of, or a response to, each
individual point made via the public consultation. Many of the larger issues and individual points
were raised by the Select Committee which are addressed in the responses set out below, some
recommended minor adjustments to the drafting, which we have incorporated in further iterations
of the draft Bill, and many raised issues which have already been considered prior to the White
Paper and its associated consultation exercise and upon which conclusions have been reached
following those previous consultation exercises. Instead we have highlighted those points arising
from the public consultation which we propose to take forward through amendments to the draft
Bills.
21. In order to inform the scrutiny and public understanding of the draft Heritage Protection Bill,
DCMS and the Welsh Assembly Government also published a draft statutory instrument, code of
practice and guidance on the Ecclesiastical Exemption (a mechanism which provides for certain
denominations to be exempted from the need to obtain Heritage Asset Consent when undertaking
works or making repairs to registered ecclesiastical assets in ecclesiastical use, e.g., registered
churches, registered tombs in churchyards), and also draft guidance on the operation of Historic
Environment Records in England. We received a number of helpful responses to these documents,
which we will take into account as we continue to draft the full range of statutory instruments and
guidance that will come into force when the Heritage Protection Bill is implemented.

6

Chapter Three: Draft Heritage Protection Bill: Response
to recommendations of the Committee and Public
Consultation
22. The Committee made 11 speciﬁc conclusions and recommendations, the details of which
are set out below, followed by Government’s response.
Recommendation One
We welcome the provision of the long-awaited heritage legislation and support the Government
in its aim to reform, modernise, and streamline the present system. We particularly welcome
the intention to put “heritage at the heart of planning”, yet see little evidence to suggest that
the Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) has had any signiﬁcant
involvement with the draft Bill thus far. The success of the proposed reforms will depend a
great deal on additional planning guidance and funding from DCLG. The Government must
therefore maintain its commitment to DCLG being an active participant in the passage of
the new legislation.
Response
23. The Government is fully aware of the need for a joined-up approach to reforming the
heritage protection system, which straddles the remits of a number of Departments, in particular
DCMS, CLG, Defra and the Welsh Assembly Government. Many elements of the heritage
protection regime, particularly the system for consents, sit within the planning system, which is
the responsibility of CLG. DCMS has been working closely with colleagues at CLG throughout
the process which led to the publication of the Heritage Protection White Paper, the draft Bill and
beyond, but takes on board the point that, to external observers of the progress of the Bill and
documents associated with the Bill, this closeness has not always been obvious. We are happy
to reassure the Committee that the two Departments are working together, along with English
Heritage, to create new legislation and guidance that will lead to effective reforms.
24. There are already many examples of CLG engagement with the Heritage Protection Reform
Programme as a whole and the Bill in particular:

s

since publication of the Heritage Protection White Paper in April 2007, CLG has
published consultation documents on World Heritage Sites, taking forward a number of
commitments made in the White Paper:
❍

signiﬁcant developments affecting World Heritage Sites will be subject to new
notiﬁcation and call-in procedures. CLG published a consultation document on this
on 7 January 2008;

❍

following a consultation exercise between May and August 2008, amendments to the
Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 came into
force on 1 October, which put World Heritage Sites on the same footing as National
Parks, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Sites of Special Scientiﬁc Interest, and
conservation areas etc. This means that certain permitted development rights will be
restricted in those World Heritage Sites that are not listed buildings or already in
protected areas;

❍

a draft Planning Circular, which was the result of close working between CLG, DCMS
and English Heritage, is due to be published in the autumn. It sets out Government’s
commitment to protect the outstanding universal value of each of the World Heritage
Sites in England within the current planning framework.

7

s

s

s
s

DCMS chairs an ofﬁcial level Heritage Protection Reform Programme Board, which
oversees the wider reform programme, including strands of work which cover the drafting
of a new Planning Policy Statement (PPS) for the Historic Environment, the progress of
the Heritage Protection Bill, and overlaps with related legislation (e.g., the draft Marine
Bill and the Planning Bill). CLG is represented on the board at senior ofﬁcial level, as are
Defra and English Heritage, as well external independent members.
As announced by Baroness Andrews in June, a review of the heritage-related PPGs
(PPG15 – Planning and the Historic Environment and PPG16 – Archaeology and
Planning) is underway, and CLG, DCMS and English Heritage are working together with
a view to publishing a new Planning Policy Statement for the Historic Environment in
draft form by the end of 2008.
CLG policy ofﬁcials and lawyers continue to work with their DCMS counterparts as
work on the Bill progresses.
Ministers from both DCMS and CLG will be working together to support the parliamentary
passage of the Heritage Protection Bill.

25. The Government believes it is right that DCMS should take the lead on this Bill (as opposed
to having a CLG co-sponsored Bill) as heritage protection policy is DCMS’ area of responsibility
but we do, however, fully recognise the need for collaboration between the two Departments at all
levels and continue to work together.
Recommendation Two
The Committee values the opportunity to undertake pre-legislative scrutiny of the draft Bill,
yet the effectiveness of this process has been undermined by the incomplete nature of the
legislation. We ﬁnd it deeply disappointing that we have not had the opportunity to review the
draft Bill in its entirety. The sector has been denied the opportunity to examine thoroughly all
aspects of the proposed legislation, in what amounts to a fundamental modernisation of the
heritage protection system. We recommend that a complete schedule of all further necessary
legislation and guidance be published as soon as possible, together with a timetable and
arrangements for appropriate consultation and implementation.
26. With regard to the timing of the publication of the draft Bill and subsequent publication
of additional draft clauses and guidance documents, the Government’s concern was to ensure
as much draft legislation was placed in the public domain for comment as possible while still
adhering to the Parliamentary timetable. The Committee will be aware that the clauses relating
to Conservation Areas were published on 1 July and comments were invited and the twenty-eight
that were received have been reviewed and have been used to inform ongoing work on the Bill.
The Government has a genuine desire to maximise involvement and we will continue to publish
as much guidance as possible in draft.
27. The draft Heritage Protection Bill, as published in April 2008, contains many order, regulation
and direction making powers. We intend to publish the following Orders and Regulations in draft
for illustrative purposes to assist Members and Peers in the process of scrutinising the heritage
protection elements of the forthcoming legislation:
s an Order which speciﬁes the national amenity society and related organisations which
will be consulted prior to terrestrial entries on the register being included, amended
or removed; on appeals to the Secretary of State on such decisions; and in relation to
terrestrial CNIRs;
s a new Class Consents Order;
s a new Ecclesiastical Exemption Order;
s regulations on the form, content and availability to the public of the Heritage Register for
England.

8

28. There is also a range of Orders and Regulations that we aim to publish in draft as part of the
implementation process, the timing of which will be dependent upon the timing of introduction
of the Bill. A full list of statutory instruments, which will be ﬁnalised when the drafting of the
Bill itself has been ﬁnalised, will be published when the Heritage Protection Bill is introduced in
Parliament.
29. In addition to the draft guidance on Historic Environment Records and the Ecclesiastical
Exemption, published in May 2008, DCMS, CLG and English Heritage will also be publishing
a range of guidance, from the point of introduction of the Bill up to its implementation. The ﬁrst
stage in this process will be a draft PPS for the Historic Environment, which will be published by
the end of 2008.
Recommendation Three
The Government must prioritise the revision of PPGs 15 and 16 to ensure that the new
guidance on planning policy can be implemented at the same time as the Bill. It would be
unsatisfactory for the heritage sector to be consulted on the draft Bill without also being
consulted on a draft of the revised planning guidance. The sector must have the opportunity
to reﬂect upon the complete package of reforms.
30. It has always been Government’s intention that new legislation should be accompanied by
a revised and updated statement of planning policy which promotes informed conservation of our
cultural heritage and the realisation of its socio-economic and environmental beneﬁts. Mirroring
the uniﬁed approach proposed for the statutory heritage protection system, it is intended that the
policy elements of PPG15 (Planning and the Historic Environment) and PPG16 (Archaeology and
Planning) will be reviewed and combined in a single Planning Policy Statement for the Historic
Environment, and that this will be supported by a range of practitioner-oriented guidance. CLG,
DCMS and English Heritage are working together with a view to publishing a draft of the new
PPS by the end of 2008; further guidance will follow. Engagement with the heritage sector and
other stakeholders is a key part of this process – we wish to capitalise on the lessons learned by
those concerned with implementation of the longstanding policies set out in PPG15 and PPG16.
Recommendation Four
We recommend that the Government ensures that the role of statutory consultees such as the
Theatres Trust is properly incorporated into the heritage protection reforms in addition to
their existing role in the planning system.
31. The Government has welcomed comments received from organisations that have put
forward a case for their greater involvement in the heritage protection system. In the case of
the Theatres Trust, DCMS has been constructively engaged with them and we agree that there
is scope for amendments to the Bill to enable the Theatres Trust to participate more fully in the
heritage protection system. For example, a number of provisions will be redrafted to ensure that
the Theatres Trust is capable of being included as a statutory consultee, in relation to processes
and decisions affecting theatre buildings.
Recommendation Five
The Minister’s claim that the Bill will be “pretty cost neutral” is not borne out by the
evidence we received from those who will ultimately implement it. The decision taken by
DCMS amongst others to review the current cost estimate casts further doubt on this claim.
We strongly recommend that the Government ensures that the revised impact assessment
gives a more realistic estimate of costs. The Government must heed the warnings from the
sector that an inadequately resourced Bill could be a backwards step for heritage protection.
It should proceed with the Bill, but only if it is fully aware of, and willing to meet, its full
cost.

9

32. The Impact Assessment published alongside the draft Bill looked speciﬁcally at the ﬁnancial
and non-ﬁnancial costs and beneﬁts that those provisions would bring to different groups compared
to the current situation (or ‘base case’). The ﬁnal ﬁgure of £1.72 million over ﬁve years represents
the estimated net ﬁnancial cost which balances out new burdens on local authorities and National
Park Authorities, additional investment by English Heritage, and savings made by DCMS and local
planning authority historic environment services through a new streamlined heritage protection
system. £1.72 million does not equate to the amount of investment that the Government and
English Heritage intends to invest in ensuring the new system can be implemented effectively.
This ﬁgure is much higher. The new burdens for local authorities and National Park Authorities
identiﬁed in the current Impact Assessment, namely the uniﬁed consent regime and the new HER
duties, amount to just over £4.34 million over 5 years, which Government is committed to funding.
Furthermore, around £2 million is being invested by English Heritage for a training and capacity
building programme, plus the £632,000 shown as a one-off transitional cost for implementing the
new HER duties.
33. We are aware that a number of organisations challenged the cost estimate in the Impact
Assessment, arguing that, for example, up to £100 million was needed for heritage. These estimates
appear to be guided not by an analysis of the speciﬁc provisions of the Heritage Protection Bill
itself (which falls within the scope of an Impact Assessment) but rather from an estimate of
funds desired to raise the overall standard of excellence in the provision of services in the wider
historic environment and local government sectors. On the other hand, organisations such as the
Institute of Field Archaeologists were generally content with the ﬁgures quoted, stating in their
response that “the IFA broadly agrees with the assumptions, sensitivities and evidence base set out
in impact assessment and therefore has no reason to believe that the costs and beneﬁts presented
are inaccurate” and “we do not believe that the transfer to local authorities of responsibility for
issuing consents for designated archaeological sites (representing less than 2% of the assets on
Historic Environment Records) will present a substantial additional burden.”
34. Bearing in mind the range of views on the ﬁgures quoted in the draft Impact Assessment,
the Government welcomed the opportunity to sit on a working group convened by the LGA to
look at the ﬁgures published in the draft Impact Assessment and investigate their robustness with a
view to seeing whether any further costs or savings could be identiﬁed and quantiﬁed. In addition
to LGA and DCMS, the group comprised representatives from English Heritage, Communities
and Local Government, the Association of Local Government Archaeological Ofﬁcers and the
Institute of Historic Building Conservation. The ﬁndings of this working group will be sent to the
Select Committee and will feed in to the Impact Assessment that will accompany the Heritage
Protection Bill on introduction.
35. The ﬁnal version of the Heritage Protection Bill will contain clauses that were not published
in the draft Bill, and clauses that will have been revised since publication of the draft, so the
Impact Assessment will, of necessity, need to be revised. The costs and beneﬁts of these new
provisions will be explained and costed in the new Impact Assessment.
Recommendation Six
We ﬁnd the comments by DCMS and English Heritage that there is unlikely to be a shortage
of conservation ofﬁcers in local government in future years astonishing. There is already
a shortage of conservation ofﬁcers in the country and, aside from English Heritage, the
sector appears united in its recognition that there will be not be the staff with the necessary
skills to replace existing conservation ofﬁcers once they retire. The statistics provided by the
IHBC would seem to support this ﬁnding. We urge the Government and English Heritage
to reconsider their approach to this matter. Conservation ofﬁcers, in sufﬁcient numbers
and with adequate training, will be critical to the successful implementation of the Bill. We
recommend that the Government sets out a strategy for maintaining sufﬁcient numbers of
conservation ofﬁcers with the necessary skills.

10

36. The heritage protection system set out in the draft Bill is built around the uniﬁcation of two
different statutory regimes for the protection and management of terrestrial heritage – the Listed
Building regime, which is currently largely implemented at local level by Conservation Ofﬁcers,
and the Scheduled Ancient Monument regime, which is largely managed by DCMS and English
Heritage (although the protection and management of non-scheduled, but nationally important,
archaeology is implemented at local level by Archaeological Ofﬁcers); planners, too, are involved
in the management of heritage protection at local level. When the new legislation is implemented,
there will be a need for greater integration of separate professions and cross-fertilisation of skills
and new ways of working to ensure successful delivery on the ground. That is why English Heritage
is rolling out a programme of training and capacity building so that there will be sufﬁcient skills
at local level, for Conservation Ofﬁcers, Archaeological Ofﬁcers and planners. Government and
English Heritage are continuing to work with all professional bodies to ensure local planning
authorities will be ready to implement the new heritage protection regime.
37. With regard to the speciﬁc points raised about the loss of Conservation Ofﬁcers, it remains
Government’s view that information about the number of historic environment professionals
employed by local planning authorities is limited and does not enable long term trends to be
identiﬁed. While the annual rise in archaeological staff in local planning authorities is tracked by
survey data, with the exception of the Quantifying Local Authority Conservation stafﬁng survey
undertaken in 2006, similar detailed ﬁgures on the numbers of conservation ofﬁcers is difﬁcult to
ﬁnd.
38. Government understands that recent ﬁgures from the Institute of Historic Building
Conservation indicate that there is broadly the same number of members in the 40-45 age range
as there is for each of the ﬁve cohorts up to the 60-65 range, after which it tails off. This would
seem to imply a stable situation for the next 20+ years, but it is an imprecise indicator as not all
local authority staff employed in buildings conservation are members of the IHBC, while IHBC
membership also includes people employed outside local authorities and in non-conservation
specialisms. We believe the data to undertake analyses of the staff resource is currently not
sufﬁciently robust to allow for meaningful results to be forthcoming or conclusions to be drawn.
39. To ensure that data is up to date and directly comparable, English Heritage is commissioning
updated ﬁgures for local authority conservation and archaeological staff, so that decisions about the
level of need, and any capacity-building which may arise, can be taken in the light of more robust
data. These data will provide a baseline from which changes during and after the implementation
of HPR can be measured. The ﬁgures will be available this Autumn. Government will review its
position when this information becomes available.
Recommendation Seven
We recommend that the Impact Assessment is revised to provide greater clarity on who will
receive training, and by whom, as part of the reforms to be introduced by the Bill.
40. The Impact Assessment referred to English Heritage’s commitment to cover the cost of a
training and capacity building programme to ensure that the sector had the right skills, capacity
and knowledge of the new system so that a smooth transition could be made from current regime
to new ways of working. In their submission to the Select Committee, English Heritage was in
a position to state that £2.2million had been allocated to this programme, which breaks down as
follows:

11

2008/09
£k
4 Pilot Training Courses for LPA.s and the sector

2009/10
£k

2010/11
£k

300

200

50

1000 x 5 basic training days for LPA and the Sector
1000 x 2–4 advanced training days for LPA
and sector

800

Development of e-learning packages @10K

20

50

60

Website System enhancement

10

20

100

Commissioning Training Needs Assessment

60

Support costs – leaﬂets, seminars, literature etc.

20

30

40

Redeployment of specialist staff resource to
support training programme

100

170

170

Totals:

260

570

1,370

Total over three years

£2.2M

Recommendation Eight
We recognise that Heritage Partnership Agreements (HPAs) have, in a limited number of
cases, offered signiﬁcant cost savings. However, we are not convinced that a robust business
case for the widespread introduction of HPAs has yet been demonstrated. We therefore
recommend that the number of HPAs is restricted until there is more consistent evidence to
justify their wider implementation. We welcome the statement from English Heritage that
HPAs may only be introduced with the agreement of the relevant local authority. Nevertheless,
the Government will need to deﬁne very tightly the type of estates which may be considered
for HPAs to ensure that inappropriate applications are not an unnecessary drain on local
authority resources.
41. Heritage Partnership Agreements (HPAs) are voluntary in nature – the Heritage Protection
Bill does not contain any provisions that compel parties to adopt a partnership agreement. What the
Bill does is to provide a statutory framework for such agreements and a means by which speciﬁed
works can be dealt with under the class consent system. This will ensure that repeat Heritage Asset
Consent applications for works speciﬁed in an agreement need not be made, thereby reducing the
burden on local planning authorities and enabling better management of heritage assets (see also
Issue Eight below).
42. Because of the voluntary nature of HPAs and the need for initial investment (as described
in the evidence submitted to the Committee) we believe that, to a certain degree, they will be
self-limiting and accordingly there will not be any need to restrict their adoption. There will,
however, be a need for best practice guidance and training for those wishing to participate in
HPAs. As stated in the Heritage Protection White Paper, English Heritage will publish guidance
on developing and managing HPAs for owners, local planning authorities and other interested
parties, before the legislation is implemented. English Heritage has also recently conducted the
ﬁrst training workshop on Heritage Partnership Agreements, and a series of four more are planned
for January and February 2009.

12

43. While many respondents to consultation on the draft Bill clearly welcomed the introduction
of HPAs and Government is ﬁrmly of the view that they are capable of delivering signiﬁcant
beneﬁts in terms of improved understanding and management of heritage assets as well as
monetary savings, we acknowledge the concerns of the Committee with regard to presenting a
clearer business case for the beneﬁts of HPAs. We will continue to review the cost/beneﬁt estimates
of HPAs using data from the ﬁrst round of English Heritage HPA pilots, and look forward to
receiving further information on the next tranche of pilots.
44. 17 new pilots have been started this year, due to be completed by the end of 2008/09. They
seek to test aspects of new approaches to new designation and the management regimes and issues
arising from it, in particular the application of HPAs in a wide range of situations. Outcomes are
expected to include examples of best practice with wider applicability; tested models for effective
partnership-based management of the Historic Environment; and quantiﬁed examples of more
effective focusing of resources. All completed HPA pilots will include an evaluation of baseline
costs and resultant savings, both monetary and in time spent.
The full list is:
North East

Belsay Hall, Northumberland (EH property)
Byker Estate, Newcastle

North West

Goodshaw Chapel, Lancashire (EH property)
Lancaster Canal

Yorkshire and Humberside

Roche Abbey, Yorkshire (EH property)
Pocklington Canal, East Yorkshire

East of England

Burgh Castle, Norfolk (EH Property)
Orfordness, Suffolk

East Midlands

Bolsover Castle, Derbyshire (EH Property)
Lincoln Castle

South East

Portchester Castle, Hampshire (EH Property)
Canterbury Cathedral, Kent

London

London Fire Brigades

West Midlands

Wroxeter, Shropshire (EH Property)
Sutton Park, Birmingham

South West

Old Sarum, Wiltshire (EH Property)
Guildhall, Bath

Recommendation Nine
Neither DCMS nor English Heritage presented any evidence that they have reviewed the
operation or effectiveness of current enforcement powers. Nor do they appear to have
considered any amendments to the legislation which would improve the operation or
effectiveness of these powers or reinforce the guidance published by DCLG. We consider that
such a review should be conducted as a matter or urgency and the results published with a
view to improving the operation of the legislation.

13

45. The draft Heritage Protection Bill maintains the current levels of protection for designated
heritage assets and the current mechanisms for addressing wilful negligence and illegal works –
enforcement notices, repairs notices, and compulsory purchase. We acknowledge the Committee’s
concerns regarding heritage at risk and whether the enforcement regime is sufﬁciently robust
and well-used as to address that risk. As Baroness Andrews noted in her introduction to the
Department for Communities and Local Government’s Best Practice Guidance on Listed Building
Prosecutions (December 2006), “evidence suggests that whilst the mechanisms are in place for
listed building enforcement, they are not widely used”. However, while it may be the case that
existing enforcement powers are not widely used, we believe that they are the right powers.
Government wants to keep the right balance between enabling protection and punishing illegality
and wilful neglect – the provisions in the Bill reﬂect that balance.
46. For example, there may be a number of reasons why a building may be at risk, some of which
may be best addressed through enforcement, and some through other means. Wilful neglect or illegal
works by the owner, for example, may be best addressed through enforcement or prosecution, but
lack of knowledge as to how best to protect a building at risk or maintain a building so that it does
not fall into the “at risk” category, may be best addressed through education and access to guidance
and advice from organisations like English Heritage. Government believes that some of the Bill’s
provisions – like HPAs – and the general ethos of the heritage protection reform programme with
its focus on pre-application discussion and greater partnership, should lead to fewer problems that
need to be resolved through enforcement. In addition, it is intended that on introduction, the Bill will
provide powers to implement a civil sanctions regime, in line with the provisions of the Regulatory
Enforcement and Sanctions Act 2008. This will provide regulators with increased ﬂexibility and
proportionality in dealing with cases where offences have been committed.
47. We recognise that enforcement powers will, however, need to be reinforced by guidance. As
indicated in paragraph 45 above, guidance to local authorities on how and when to exercise their
enforcement powers was last published by CLG in December 2006. Prior to the implementation of
the Heritage Protection Bill, this will need to be revisited to take account of the terminology and
structure of the new regime. Government will take the opportunity, as part of consultation on this
new draft guidance, to review the operation of the current enforcement powers and how well they
are understood at local authority level.
Recommendation Ten
We take the view that this additional stage of consultation would be likely to render the
enforcement powers even less effective than at present and recommend that this requirement
be removed.
48. We are grateful to the Committee for pointing out that the requirement in Clause 130 that in
England the local planning authority must consult English Heritage and in Wales, Welsh Ministers,
before issuing an Historic Asset Enforcement Notice is an unnecessary stage in enforcement
proceedings, which is likely to delay matters. Accordingly, it will be removed from the Bill prior
to its introduction.
Recommendation Eleven
The Bill represents a signiﬁcant opportunity for reform, but its incompleteness and the
absence of the associated secondary legislation has left the Committee guessing about whether
important issues may have been missed by DCMS and DCLG which might otherwise not be
evaluated again for many years. We therefore recommend that the two departments review a
number of issues brought to our attention in the submissions, but not referred to elsewhere in
this report.
49. Paragraph 44 of the Report lists ﬁfteen further issues chosen by the Select Committee from
the evidence received. The Government will respond to these individually as set out below:

14

Issue One
Examination of the potential to incorporate clauses within the Bill fostering the role of
preventative maintenance of heritage assets before their condition requires statutory
intervention to prompt repair.
50. The Heritage Protection Bill does not contain provisions imposing a duty of care, or a
requirement for preventative maintenance, on those responsible for registered heritage assets,
and we do not intend to make any changes to include such provisions. The Bill does, however,
clearly set out the responsibilities of those involved in managing the historic environment, and the
penalties involved for those who fail to adhere to their responsibilities. A requirement to undertake
preventative maintenance would not bring any additional beneﬁts, as a failure to undertake this
requirement could only be addressed through identiﬁcation of neglect, which is covered by the
provisions for repairs notices. Government believes that we need to strike a balance between
imposing burdens on public bodies and private individuals, and making sure that we protect and
manage our heritage in a way that enables us to pass it on to future generations, through legislation,
guidance, training and education. The Heritage Protection Bill strikes that balance through its
provisions for consent and enforcement, and new online Registers, which will provide owners
with a greater degree of information on what constitutes the special interest of individual assets.
Issue Two
Establishment of a clearer context for the involvement of the national museums and the
voluntary sector (including local civic and amenity societies, historical and archaeological
groups) by incorporating the word “organisations” – as well as individuals – into the category
of those with special knowledge or interest to assist heritage authorities.
51. Clause 9 of the draft Bill sets out those categories of individual and organisation which
should be formally consulted by English Heritage (in England) and Welsh Ministers (in Wales)
before including, amending or removing a register entry. As drafted, the Bill allows for specialised
historical and archaeological groups to be represented through the National Amenity Societies,
which include, among others, the Civic Trust (which represents 700 smaller voluntary organisations),
the Council for British Archaeology, the Georgian Group, the Victorian Society and the Twentieth
Century Society. Furthermore, the use of the word ‘person’ in subsection (3)(e) enjoys its usual
wide legislative meaning of individual and body, both corporate and unincorporated, which
includes voluntary organisations of the kind referred to by respondents. There is therefore no need
to amend the drafting.
Issue Three
In the absence of detail about local designation in the draft Bill; review of the case for a
statutory duty upon local authorities to develop and maintain local lists of heritage assets.
52. The Bill contains provisions to introduce a statutory basis for the identiﬁcation of heritage
structures and open spaces with ‘special local interest’ (i.e. special local historic, archaeological,
architectural or artistic interest), but it does not impose a statutory duty on local planning authorities
to develop and maintain local lists. Local designation provides communities with an opportunity
to identify and manage those aspects of their heritage that are important to them, and we believe
that it is appropriate that the use of local designation powers will be at the discretion of local
planning authorities who are aware of and responsive to their local communities rather than as a
centrally imposed statutory duty.
53. By placing local designation on a statutory basis we recognise that we are introducing formal
stages to the local designation process, but these steps will help to ensure that the identiﬁcation
and management of assets with local special interest takes place with a degree of transparency that
is proportionate to the additional controls being introduced.

15

Issue Four
Review of the role of the National Amenity Societies to ensure they are notiﬁed about
applications to demolish heritage structures, not just in cases of new designations.
54. Clause 103 of the draft Bill gives the Secretary of State and Welsh Ministers the power to make
regulations governing the procedure for dealing with Heritage Asset Consent applications, and
clause 86 requires that any works resulting in the demolition or destruction of a registered heritage
structure (amongst other things) will require such consent. The regulation-making power in clause
103 essentially replicates the current direction under s15(5) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
Conservation Areas) Act 1990. The direction under the 1990 Act in Circular 01/2001 as amended
by 09/2005 (DCMS 01/2005)), requires local planning authorities to notify the national amenity
societies of certain descriptions of applications for listed building consent; regulations under
Heritage Protection legislation will continue the effect of the current provision.
Issue Five
Greater clarity about the role of the National Amenity Societies in the scrutiny of Heritage
Partnership Agreements.
55. There are already provisions in the draft Bill for National Amenity Societies to be involved
in the scrutiny of Heritage Partnership Agreements through clause 159(3)(a) which enables
them to be consulted prior to the making or varying of a Heritage Partnership Agreement where
appropriate, and the regulation-making powers in clause 159(4)(a) which enables people and
organisations to be speciﬁed as required consultees.
Issue Six
The incorporation of appropriate recognition (rather than the abolition of) Areas of
Archaeological Importance (AAIs).
56. Government is grateful for the respondents to both the Select Committee and the Department
who have highlighted the potential loss of protection for those nationally designated Areas of
Archaeological Interest under the proposal, set out in the White Paper, to revoke that particular
designation. We have explored whether it would be possible to maintain the levels of protection
if the AAI designation were removed, and do not believe it would. Government is committed to
retaining current levels of protection, and is continuing to work with English Heritage to ﬁnd the
best solution.
Issue Seven
Revocation of the current Class Consents Order as outlined in the Heritage White Paper for
Class 1 consents relating to agricultural, horticultural and forestry operations on (former)
scheduled ancient monuments.
57. The ‘Class Consents’ system currently applies only to Scheduled Ancient Monuments. It
gives consent for certain categories of works to be undertaken and so, for those categories of
works, removes the need to apply for Scheduled Monument Consent on a case by case basis. The
Heritage Protection White Paper included a commitment to revoke the class consent for agriculture
(CC1), acknowledging that it permits the destruction of nationally important archaeological sites
– typically through ploughing and subsoiling.
58. The Bill provides for an order making power for the Secretary of State and the Welsh
Ministers to grant, vary and revoke class consents in relation to the new Heritage Asset Consent
(HAC) which merges Scheduled Monument Consent with Listed Building Consent. Government
does not propose to introduce a Class Consent for agriculture in relation to assets designated
following commencement of the Bill, but recognises that there is a transitional issue concerning

16

former Scheduled Ancient Monuments that are currently subject to cultivation under the terms
of CC1. As part of its Heritage at Risk initiative, English Heritage will therefore initiate a rolling
programme to identify those assets likely to beneﬁt most from prioritised withdrawal from
CC1, and will seek to negotiate alternative management solutions with their owners (such as an
Environmental Stewardship scheme or a Heritage Partnership Agreement), as an alternative to
returning such assets to the standard consents regime.
Issue Eight
Consideration of a Class Consents procedure within the Bill’s provision for Heritage
Partnership Agreements.
59. Clauses 157-160 of the draft Bill make provision for statutory management agreements, to
be known as Heritage Partnership Agreements (HPAs). Where HPAs contain provisions relating to
speciﬁed works to registered heritage structures, it is intended that these works will have HAC (for
the parties to the HPA) by way of a class consent order made under clause 93. The Bill is currently
drafted to enable HPAs to operate by way of a class consents procedure.
Issue Nine
Review of the registration of open spaces as heritage assets in England to accord with the
wider deﬁnition in Wales.
60. Government is committed to maintaining current levels of protection through the replacement
of existing legislation with the new Heritage Protection Bill. Accordingly, as at present, the
Heritage Protection Bill will recognise and protect those designed landscapes of special interest
by including them in the Heritage Register and making the desirability of preserving the registered
heritage structure or open space and its setting a material consideration in planning decisions.
61. Since this would be a Bill for England and Wales, it therefore makes provisions for
Landscapes of Historic Interest in Wales which are currently registered to remain registered
under the new regime. The Register of Landscapes of Historic Interest in Wales already exists and
comes in two volumes describing 58 landscapes in Wales that are of outstanding or special historic
interest. These historic landscapes are inseparable from natural scenic landscapes but they serve
to highlight the physical evidence of past ages of all periods.
Issue Ten
Review of the role of the DCMS National Historic Ships Unit in relation to the assignment of
responsibility for designating marine assets to English Heritage.
62. The draft Heritage Protection Bill does not contain provisions to assign responsibility for
designating marine assets to English Heritage. As at present registration decisions will be taken by
the Secretary of State, and will remain discretionary. The Bill also contains provisions for English
Heritage (in most cases) to issue licences authorising activities in a registered marine heritage site
that would otherwise be prohibited.
63. The draft Bill integrates the protection of marine heritage sites with the terrestrial heritage
protection system in a uniﬁed register. The protection currently available under the Protection of
Wrecks Act 1973 is limited to vessels lying wrecked on or in the seabed in UK territorial waters.
The new marine regime will apply to UK territorial waters adjacent to England and Wales and
will enable a broader range of assets to be registered, from submerged lithic scatters to wrecked
aircraft, as well as continuing protection for designated wrecked vessels.
64. National Historic Ships is an Advisory Non Departmental Public Body advising the Secretary
of State for Culture, Media and Sport on national historic ship preservation and funding priorities.
It advises the Heritage Lottery Fund and other public funding bodies on preservation priorities
and individual applications. It also acts as a focus for advice on aspects of the preservation of

17

historic vessels and maintains the National Register of Historic Vessels database. It does not have
the expertise or resources to undertake the registration of marine heritage sites, which extend
protection to a broad range of assets that is wider than just vessels, or to administer the associated
licensing arrangements.
65. We have no plans to review the role of National Historic Ships with regard to the operation
of provisions for the protection of registered marine heritage sites under the Heritage Protection
Bill, but we do recognise that there are unresolved issues with regard to ships on the National
Register of Historic Vessels and are happy to continue our ongoing and productive dialogue with
the Advisory Committee, National Historic Ships with a view to assessing the speciﬁc needs of
these assets and developing an appropriate and practicable regime for their protection.
Issue Eleven
Greater clarity to statutory deﬁnitions including those related to “national importance”
rather than “special archaeological importance”; “ﬁxtures and ﬁttings” rather than
deﬁnition by case law; “special interest” for historic assets of both national and local interest;
and terminology relating to earthworks, archaeological remains and battleﬁelds so that
metal-detector users can better understand their legal obligations (e.g. under the Portable
Antiquities Scheme).
66. Under the provisions of the Bill, English Heritage and Welsh Ministers are required to
publish criteria by reference to which they will decide whether an asset is of special architectural,
archaeological, historic or artistic interest, and they will also publish guidance for local authorities
on determining criteria for special local architectural, archaeological, historic and artistic interest.
English Heritage are also working on a series of Selection Guides for a range of asset types, which
will help to inform the wider public. English Heritage and DCMS have already begun work on
guidance for metal detectorists, building on Our Portable Past, which will help them to understand
their obligations under the new heritage protection legislation. These publications on special interest
and metal detecting will be issued before the Heritage Protection Bill comes into force.
67. Deﬁnitions in legislation will always be subject to interpretation by the courts, and therefore
informed by case law. The current understanding of whether an object is a ﬁxture or ﬁtting is
determined on a case-by-case basis, in the light of existing case law – we have no plans to move
towards a more rigid or broad deﬁnition through amendments to the Heritage Protection Bill.
Issue Twelve
Review of appropriate buffer zones for World Heritage Sites in circumstances where
conservation area designation is not appropriate or likely to be an ineffective means
of planning control and where DCLG needs to provide context for this through Local
Development Frameworks.
68. A consultation document on a joint CLG/DCMS draft Circular on World Heritage Sites was
issued in May and ran until 22 August 2008. The Circular meets a commitment in the Heritage
Protection White Paper to “recognise in national policy the need to protect World Heritage Sites as
sites of outstanding universal value, and – make more prominent the need to create a management
plan for each WHS, including, where needed, the delineation of a buffer zone around it.”
69. The Consultation Paper also set out proposals to amend the Town and Country Planning
(General Permitted Development) Order 1995 (GPDO). This change would put WHS on the
same footing as other protected areas such as conservation areas and areas of outstanding natural
beauty. The amendment of the GPDO will curtail permitted development rights for development
in WHS and aims to protect WHS from adverse cumulative effects of smaller-scale development.
The amendment came into effect on 1 October.

18

70. CLG intends to publish the Circular (taking into account responses received) in the autumn
and will publish an analysis of the consultation responses by the end of the year.
71. In the light of responses submitted to the DCMS during pre-legislative scrutiny, the Report
of the Committee, and respondents to the joint DCMS/CLG consultation referred to above,
Government also intends to amend Clause 155 of the published draft of the Bill so that the duty on
local planning authorities to take registered structures and registered open spaces and their settings
into account when determining planning applications will be extended to include World Heritage
Sites. We believe this will introduce an appropriate level of consideration of World Heritage Sites,
and their settings, in planning decisions, and is in line with the existing advice in Planning Policy
Guidance Note 15. We, and English Heritage, will be discussing the implications of this decision
further with the relevant LPAs prior to implementation of the legislation.
Issue Thirteen
Recognition under the criteria for justifying the designation heritage assets of the “technical
interest” (of engineering structures) in the same way that “architectural interest” recognises
the separate built-environment disciplines of architecture from engineering.
72. The Heritage Protection Bill sets out four statutory criteria for use in determining whether
heritage structures or heritage open spaces should be registered: special historic, archaeological,
architectural or artistic interest. These are the only criteria on which a decision on whether to
register can be made, and we have no plans to add to them.
73. In the same way that Principles of Selection under PPG15 currently provide further detail on
what may constitute that ‘special’ interest under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
Areas) Act 1990 and Annex 4 of PPG16 does likewise in relation to the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Areas Act 1979, so replacement guidance will be issued to support the criteria
under the Heritage Protection Bill. Since a registrable structure speciﬁcally includes machinery,
we anticipate that the guidance will cover special historic, archaeological, architectural or artistic
interest as it pertains to machinery.
74. English Heritage has already published selection guides on Industrial Buildings, Transport
Buildings, and Utilities and Communications Buildings, amongst other building types, in order
to develop understanding of designated buildings and structures in an engineering context, and to
offer insight into designation decision and where ‘special interest’ may lie.
Issue Fourteen
Further consideration of the designation of Ancient Trees as heritage assets as outlined by
arboricultural organisations on the basis of their age and close association with people and
events; and identiﬁcation of responsibility within central government for the establishment
of a national record of these assets.
75. The Heritage Protection Bill does not contain any speciﬁc provisions to register and protect
veteran trees and we have no plans to change this.
76. Under current legislation, trees of special historic interest may be recognised within the
heritage protection system when they form part of registered parks or gardens or conservation
areas. Furthermore, trees of special historic interest within SSSIs can be protected through
consultation and regulation of site management. The SSSI series includes the majority (if not
all) the most important concentrations of veteran trees (e.g. the New Forest, Windsor, Sherwood,
Epping etc). Trees can also be protected through Tree Preservation Orders.
77. The contributions that individual trees, hedgerows made up of trees, areas of ancient
woodland etc. make to the historic character of landscape are already taken into account in the
process known as Historic Landscape Characterisation (HLC). HLC is sponsored by English

19

Heritage and is currently in the ﬁnal stage of being rolled out across England. Its applications
include informing spatial planning and land management strategies.
78. We believe that trees of special historic interest are appropriately protected through planning,
heritage protection and environmental protection regimes and an additional register of trees of
special historic interest with an additional level of statutory protection through a consents or
licensing regime (as for registered heritage structures and marine heritage sites) in the Heritage
Protection Bill is not required. The introduction of a separate national register of trees of special
interest, based on such wide-ranging criteria as ancient, cultural, historical, champion and rare,
is not something for the Heritage Protection Bill, but is something better considered by areas
of Government responsible for the natural environment and local authorities. The ﬁrst stage in
developing a strategy for the future development of LA tree management in England Trees in
Towns II was recently published by CLG (February 2008). Local planning authorities can also
draw on resources such as the Ancient Tree Hunt database compiled by the Woodland Trust with
the help of HLF funding (see http://www.ancient-tree-hunt.org.uk/project/hunt/), and the range of
advice and information provided by the Forestry Commission (see http://www.forestry.gov.uk/).
Issue Fifteen
Further review of marine designations in relation to the transfer of the registration of
marine designations to English Heritage from the Secretary of State; the identiﬁcation of
appropriate expertise; the reforms of Salvage Law; the relationship to the Receiver of Wrecks;
the protection of inter-tidal sites; the encouragement of reporting of marine discoveries to
archaeologists; the introduction of Class Consents to obviate the provision for “unintrusive
diving”; the introduction of better management through marine HPAs; and recognition
of the Maritime Management Organisation as a “relevant” authority with a duty to have
regard for registered assets.
79. The marine sections of the draft Heritage Protection Bill arise from years of public
consultation. In 2004, DCMS published a marine-speciﬁc consultation document Protecting our
Marine Historic Environment: Making the System Work Better, to which there were 122 responses.
Following detailed consideration of the results of that consultation the Heritage Protection White
Paper set out Government’s position on marine heritage protection. Bearing in mind the operation
of the devolution settlement (responsibility for the historic environment, including out to the 12
nautical mile limit of territorial waters adjacent to Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales, is a
devolved matter) the draft Heritage Protection Bill takes forward the position set out in the White
Paper, including the decision not to proceed with a wholesale revision of salvage law.
80. We consider that our provisions to reform the marine heritage protection regime in England
and Wales offer the best way of protecting marine heritage assets. The Bill contains provisions to:
s broaden the range of marine heritage assets that can be protected;

s
s

bring greater ﬂexibility to the licensing system;
place a new duty on the Receiver of Wreck to report information relating to marine
heritage to heritage authorities.

81. As mentioned above, the draft Heritage Protection Bill does not contain provisions to assign
responsibility for designating marine assets to English Heritage. As at present registration decisions
will be taken by the Secretary of State, and will remain discretionary. In general, English Heritage
will issue marine heritage licences. We believe these reforms establish the right balance between
protecting heritage, promoting good practice among sea-users, and not imposing undue burdens
on sea-users.
82. The licensing provisions contained in the Bill are sufﬁciently broad to deliver the aims
of management agreements without the need for a separate statutory framework just for marine
heritage partnership agreements. The provision in Clause 198 which enables the Secretary of State

20

to designate particular marine heritage sites as suitable for unintrusive diving activities will reduce
numbers of licence applications and will recognise that some marine heritage sites will be less
vulnerable than others. We see no beneﬁt in replacing this power with a Class Consent Order.
83. The Bill clariﬁes the relationship of the marine and terrestrial registration regimes for
heritage assets in the intertidal zone in clauses 71-73. Sites comprising marine assets which are
wholly or partly in the intertidal zone, being the area of the foreshore between the high and
low water marks of ordinary spring tides, can be registered under either the marine or terrestrial
regimes. If the Secretary of State decides not to register the site of such an asset under the marine
regime, the asset will be capable of registration under the terrestrial regime. The Bill prevents
the Secretary of State from applying the marine regime to a heritage structure registered as part
of the terrestrial regime in the intertidal zone. This framework ensures sufﬁcient ﬂexibility in
the protection regime so that designation decisions can take into account the most appropriate
management regime for a particular marine heritage asset.
84. DCMS is working closely with colleagues in Defra to ensure that the marine provisions in
the Heritage Protection Bill and the provisions in the Marine Bill which have a heritage dimension
complement each other effectively. Each Bill contains provisions for complementary site speciﬁc
designations (Marine Heritage Sites and Marine Conservation Zones). These have been designed
to allow the most effective management of the asset, be it an historic site or a natural feature. It
has always been the intention to operate parallel regimes to protect heritage and natural marine
features. Both designation regimes will take account of each other where appropriate.
85. While the draft Marine Bill does not contain proposals speciﬁc to the management of marine
heritage sites, marine heritage issues will be taken into account in the use and management of our
seas under the Marine Bill, e.g.:
s the marine planning proposals will ensure that heritage and cultural considerations will
be incorporated into the Marine Policy Statement and marine plans from the start;
s marine plans will be drafted in the light of wide consultation, and relevant authorities
such as English Heritage will be involved in marine planning.
86. We do not believe a further review of marine heritage protection is necessary before the
introduction of the Heritage Protection Bill.
Issues arising from Public Consultation
87. Many of the points raised in the responses submitted to DCMS during the public consultation
on the draft Bill have been covered by the Select Committee and addressed in the responses above,
or in the analysis of response to the White Paper consultation. Some, however, we have decided to
address through changes to the legislation prior to introduction.
List or Register?
88. Respondents noted their dissatisfaction with the terminology used in the draft Bill. While
the language has arisen as a result of the drafting process, to reﬂect both the breadth and the detail
of the concepts and processes we are introducing, the loss of one term in particular has proved
particularly unpopular. Recognising that the term ‘list’ has a long life in our collective memory
and has currency amongst the general population in relation to protected heritage, we will replace
the term ‘register’ in the Heritage Protection Bill with ‘list’.
Conservation Areas
89. DCMS published draft clauses on conservation areas on 1 July 2008 as a separate consultation
exercise and received twenty-eight responses. Many of the responses to consultation highlighted
concerns that the proposed consultation arrangements – which are adapted from the Planning
(Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 and refer to the publication of notices and
the holding of public meetings – are outdated. We are therefore proposing to incorporate more
modern consultation processes in our legislation.

21

Chapter Four: Draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts)
Bill: Response to recommendations of the Committee and
Public Consultation
90. The Committee made 13 speciﬁc conclusions and recommendations, the details of which
are set out below, followed by Government’s response.
One
We welcome the draft Bill, which was strongly supported in evidence. We believe that it
would, if enacted: strengthen the procedures used by the Ministry of Defence when training
personnel in respect for cultural property and taking cultural sites into account when
planning operations; respond to criticisms that Coalition troops in Iraq did not always
follow high standards of behaviour in treatment of cultural property; and encourage more
Commonwealth states to sign up to the Convention and the two Protocols.
91. Government is grateful for the support of the Committee for the draft Cultural Property
(Armed Conﬂicts) Bill.
Two
We were struck by the willingness of the Ministry of Defence to embrace the principles of
the Convention and its two Protocols. It may well be that the Ministry of Defence harbours
reservations about the practicality of observing those principles in time of war; but we
note that UK forces already operate in conformity with the Convention and its Protocols.
We admire the decision of the Ministry of Defence to formalise its practice and accept
commitments under domestic law in relation to respect for cultural property.
92.

The Government is grateful for the Committee’s comments.

Three
There may be scope for argument as to whether the deﬁnition of an ancillary offence in the
Bill as drafted would enable the UK to satisfy its obligation under Article 15 of the Second
Protocol to comply with general principles of law and international law when establishing
criminal offences within domestic law. The Department should either satisfy itself that the
present drafting is tight enough or it should draw up new wording corresponding to that
used in the International Criminal Court Act 2001.
93. The government is considering the points made and will ensure that the Bill will enable the
UK to satisfy its obligation under Article 15 of the Second Protocol.
Four
We believe that clause 5 of the draft Bill should recognise the concept of being “art and part”
in the commission of an offence, so as to render it applicable under Scots law.
94. The Department, in consultation with the Ofﬁce of the Solicitor to the Advocate General,
has reviewed the drafting of clause 5 and will amend the clause to include appropriate reference
to a person being “art and part” in the commission of an offence.
Five
We believe that the omission of any requirement for authority to use the cultural emblem to
identify cultural property undergoing protected transportation was an oversight of drafting
which should be rectiﬁed. We recommend that the draft Bill should be duly amended.

22

95. We thank the Committee for their point regarding authority for use of the cultural emblem.
In evidence to the Committee the British Red Cross expressed concern that clause 12 would
enable a person transporting moveable cultural property to use the emblem without obtaining
speciﬁc permission. Clause 11 (3) provides for the national authority to grant permission that
may be either general or speciﬁc. To impose a requirement for a speciﬁc permission in every
case where cultural property is undergoing protected transportation would be administratively
burdensome and may not be practicable in the event of armed conﬂict. A general permission
may be given for particular kinds of use. Where a person wishes to rely on a general permission
that person will need to ensure that the use of the emblem is in accordance with the terms of the
general permission. Responsibility for authorising the use of the cultural emblem rests with the
appropriate national authority.
Six
We draw the attention of the Department to ambiguities and minor inconsistencies in
drafting identiﬁed by Dr O’Keefe and by the British Red Cross, and published in the evidence
accompanying this Report.
96. We thank Dr O’Keefe and the British Red Cross for their comments which will be taken into
consideration and where necessary minor amendments will be made.
Seven
We do not see why dealers should be exposed to the risk of prosecution for dealing in property
exported unlawfully from an occupied territory when there is no certainty about which
territories qualify as “occupied”. We recommend that the Bill should include a requirement
upon the Secretary of State to draw up a list of territories occupied since 1954, with periods
of occupation deﬁned.
97. An occupied territory is deﬁned in the draft Bill by reference to Article 42 of the Regulations
respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land annexed to the 1907 Hague Convention.
98. To commit the offence a person must be shown by the prosecution to know or have reason
to suspect that the cultural property has been unlawfully exported. The burden of proof rests
with the prosecution. The proposed legislation does not impose on dealers in cultural property
any requirement to carry out checks beyond the normal due diligence that they should undertake
for any piece of cultural property that they wish to buy or sell, for example, the Code of Practice
for the Control of International Trading in Works of Art. Any dealer who carried out proper due
diligence checks would be unlikely to have the necessary mental element to be convicted of a
criminal offence.
99. The Government is not aware of any of the 120 States Parties to the Convention that has
produced a list of territories that they consider to have been occupied since 1954.
Eight
We believe that it would be wrong for dealers to run the risk of prosecution every time
that they accepted an item of cultural property exported from an occupied territory, merely
because it was unclear at the time of acceptance whether or not export had been legal. Our
preferred solution would be for the draft Bill to be amended so as to adopt the wording
used in the Dealing in Cultural Objects (Offences) Act 2003, which requires an element of
dishonesty in the dealing if an offence is to have been committed. This would have the merit
of consistency with domestic law. However, we acknowledge that the Department doubts
whether this could be achieved by a simple amendment to the draft Bill as it stands. We
recommend that the Department should make a deﬁnitive statement on whether there is
any way that a requirement for a dealer to have shown dishonesty could be introduced into

23

the offence of dealing in unlawfully exported cultural property set out in clause 18 of the
draft Bill, whether through a simple amendment to the draft Bill as it stands or through the
revision suggested by the British Art Market Federation.
100. The Committee recommended that, to be committed, an offence under clause 18 of the Bill
should require an element of dishonesty on the part of the person dealing in cultural property. The
Government has taken this suggestion and the concerns of the British Art Market Federation and
others into account. The Government notes that the current drafting of clause 18 states that the
criminal offence can only be committed by a person who “know[s] or [has] reason to suspect that
[cultural property] has been unlawfully exported”. The Government considers this describes the
mens rea of the offence and there is no reason to add a speciﬁc reference to dishonesty. Therefore,
upon careful consideration, the Government believes that the current draft of the Bill should
stand.
Nine
If it proves impossible to introduce a requirement for dishonesty in dealing, for an offence to
have been committed under clause 18 of the draft Bill, we recommend that the Department
should examine whether the deﬁnition of “acquires” in the draft Bill could be tightened, to
exclude acceptance of a cultural object for the purpose of performing due diligence.
101. The Committee suggested that the deﬁnition of “acquires” in Clause 18 of the Bill should
be narrowed to exclude acceptance of a cultural object for the speciﬁc purpose of conducting due
diligence. The government remains unconvinced by the argument that due diligence checks cannot
be effectively carried out unless an object has been acquired. The Code for Crown Prosecutors
requires the prosecutor to consider whether prosecution would be in the public interest. Generally,
it is unlikely to be in the public interest to discourage a person from reporting the matter where
that person has acquired an object in good faith and subsequently discovers it has been or has
reason to suspect it may have been unlawfully exported.
Ten
We welcome the steps being taken by the Ministry of Defence to ensure that areas of cultural
signiﬁcance are taken account sooner when planning operations. We recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should undertake a benchmarking exercise to take note of good practice
by other states’ armed forces in taking cultural property and sites into account. We also urge
the Ministry of Defence, in the light of the continuing damage to Iraq’s cultural heritage
since the invasion, to bear in mind the need to provide adequate protection for cultural sites
in the aftermath of any military operation, not least from the local population.
102. The Government accepts the Committee’s recommendation to conduct a benchmarking
exercise on other States’ practices. Following ratiﬁcation, the UK will be under legal obligations
in relation to cultural sites, as set out in the Convention and Protocols, when it is a party to a noninternational armed conﬂict or an international armed conﬂict, and during any period of occupation
thereafter (assuming the other State is also a party to the Convention). Currently in Iraq none of
these circumstances exist (the UK is not a party to the non-international armed conﬂict there). In
the current circumstances in Iraq, the UK would not therefore have any legal obligations under the
Convention (even if the UK had already ratiﬁed the Convention). However, as a matter of policy,
UK may assist the new Iraqi Government in steps it may wish to take in protecting cultural sites
where appropriate and where resources allow.
Eleven
We query the ten-year delay in drawing up guidelines for implementation of a Protocol
adopted in 1999, and we recommend that the UK Government and English Heritage should
play a more active part in the preparation of those guidelines.

24

103. The Second Protocol did not enter into force until March 2004, and UNESCO then convened
a meeting to draw up guidelines for its implementation. Under UNESCO procedures, only states
which are party to the Convention and to the Second Protocol are allowed to participate in such
meetings. Ofﬁcials from DCMS and English Heritage have attended these meetings as observers
and have stressed the importance of producing the guidelines rapidly, but have no formal powers
to inﬂuence proceedings.
Twelve
We believe that a list of cultural property worthy of “general” protection should be drawn
up. However, we believe that to include all Grade 2* listed buildings and historic city centres,
as some have suggested, would risk signiﬁcantly diluting its credibility.
104. The government has already published the list of categories of UK cultural property that
it considers as worthy of general protection under the convention and does not intend to draw
up a list of speciﬁc cultural property within those categories. The categories were set out in the
Government response, published in October 2006, to the earlier public consultation on the 1954
Hague Convention and comprise the following:
a. Listed buildings of Grade I status (Category A in Scotland and Northern Ireland)
b. In England, listed historic parks and gardens of Grade I status
c. The collections of those museums and galleries that are directly sponsored or funded by
government and
d. The museums, galleries and universities in England with designated collections and, in
Scotland, with important collections
105. We agree with the Committee’s view that Grade 2* listed buildings should not be added
as a category. It is a simple matter to determine whether any given item of cultural property falls
within the stated categories. Drawing up a comprehensive list of speciﬁc cultural property is
therefore unnecessary and would not be an effective use of resources. A list is not required by the
convention and would not be binding on any court.
Thirteen
We recommend that the Government should not bring before Parliament legislation to ratify
the 1954 Hague Convention and its two Protocols until:
i) it is able to present a clear statement on whether it intends to draw up a list of
cultural property deemed to be entitled to general protection and, if so, which
cultural property will be included in that list; and
ii) what the implications for publicly funded bodies are likely to be.
106. As set out in our answer at paragraph 104 above the Government does not intend to draw up
a list of cultural property deemed to be entitled to general protection. The Government’s proposals
for categories of UK cultural property were set out in the September 2005 Consultation paper
on The 1954 Hague Convention on the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conﬂict and its two Protocols of 1954 and 1999.
107. As it is not the Government’s intention to draw up a list of cultural property deemed worthy
of general protection there will be no implications for publicly funded bodies in drawing up such
a list.
108. In general terms any extra costs incurred by publicly funded bodies (as owners of cultural
property) in peace time will be entirely voluntary – such as, for example, if they decide to afﬁx the
Blue Shield emblem to their property. There may be some additional costs for a small number of

25

owners in the event of armed conﬂict in the UK. It is not, however, possible to quantify the scale
of these at present time, as the threat of armed conﬂict taking place in the UK in the near future is
negligible.
Public Consultation
109. DCMS received 5 written responses on the draft Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill
from individuals and organisations (list at Annex B). These were largely duplicated in written
evidence sent to the CMS Committee, and have therefore been covered in the responses to the
points raised by the Committee.

26

Annex A: List of respondents to consultation on draft
Heritage Protection Bill *
ALGAO
Bath Preservation Trust
Battleﬁelds Trust
Brereton and Ravenhill Heritage Committee
British Institute of Organ Studies
British Property Federation
British Sub Aqua Club
Cambridgeshire County Council
Campaign to Protect Rural England
Cheshire County Council
Christopher McCoy
Church in Wales
City of Durham Council
City of London
Civic Trust
Clark & Willcocks Ltd
Chartered Surveyors
Coseley Civic Trust
Council for British Archaeology
Country Land & Business Association
County Archaeological Service of Oxfordshire County Council
Dartmoor National Park Authority
David Robins
Department for Transport
Derbyshire County Council
Devon Buildings Group
Devon County Council
Dorset County Council (Jurassic Coast Mgt Team)
Dr Mike Hodder
Durham County Council
East Sussex County Council
English National Park Authorities Association
Essex County Council
Friends of Lewes Society
Greater London Authority
Greenwich Foundation for the Old Royal Naval College
Hampshire County Council
Harrogate Borough Council
Hastings Borough Council
Hertfordshire County Council
Historic Houses Association (1)
Historic Houses Association (2)
Hugh Bayley MP
Hull City Council
ICOMOS-UK
Institute of Field Archaeologists (HERs)
Institute of Field Archaeologists (Ecclesiastical Exemption)
Jewish Heritage
Joint Committee of National Amenity Societies
Joint Nautical Archaeology Policy Committee

27

Joint Response (IHBC, RTPI, RICS, RIBA, POS, CIOB)
Kent Archaeological Rescue Unit
Kent County Council
Lancashire County Council
Lewes District Council
Lichﬁeld District Council
Local Authority World Heritage Forum
London Diocesan Fund
Lord and Lady Kennet
Maldon Conservation Service
Martineau
Mid Suffolk District Council
Montagu Evans LLP
National Council for Metal Detecting
National Federation of Cemetery Friends
National Historic Ships
Network Rail
Norfolk Churches Trust
Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information
Oil & Gas UK
Peter Pickering
Port of London Authority
Portsmouth City Council
Professional Association of Diving Instructors
Reigate and Banstead Borough Council
Renewable Energy Association
RESCUE
Royal Institute of British Architects
Savills (L&P) Ltd
Sergeant Kemp – Kent Police
Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings
Somerset County Council
South Downs Joint Committee
Staffordshire Gardens & Parks
Surrey County Council
The Crown Estate
The Law Society
Theatres Trust
Thoroton Society of Notts
Tony Robinson
Transport for London
Trevor Cooper
Twentieth Century Society
UK Association of Preservation Trusts
United Kingdom Cable Protection Committee
Wessex Archaeology (1)
Wessex Archaeology (2)
West Berkshire Council
Woodland Trust/ATF/Tree Council
Worcestershire County Council
Writtle Heritage
*This list does not mention those submissions that were sent to the Committee and copied to DCMS, which have
also been considered by ofﬁcials. A full list of all submissions received by the Committee is published in their
Report.

28

Annex B: List of respondents to consultation on draft
Cultural Property (Armed Conﬂicts) Bill
The British Art Market Federation (BAMF)
The British Red Cross (BRC)
Kevin Chamberlain
The National Council on Archives (NCA)
UK National Commission (UKNC) for UNESCO

29

Annex C: List of respondents to consultation on draft
Conservation Area Clauses
Association of Small Historic Towns and Villages
British Property Federation
British Waterways
British Waterways (II)
Campaign to Protect Rural England
Civic Trust
Country Land & Business Association
English Historic Towns Forum
Grosvenor Estate
Hastings Borough Council
Heritage Link
Historic Houses Association
Institute of Field Archaeologists
Joint Response – RTPI, IHBC, RICS, RIBA, POS and CIOB
Law Society – Planning & Environmental Law Committees
London Borough of Richmond Upon Thames
Natural England
Network Rail
Peak District National Park Authority’s Conservation Ofﬁcers
Peter Pickering
Planning Inspectorate
Primrose Hill Conservation Area Advisory Committee RIBA (part of Joint Response)
Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB) TfL
Theatres Trust
Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society (HERs Response)
Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society & Campaign to Protect Rural England
(Wiltshire Branch)

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Ofﬁce Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce
ID5936873 409900 10/08
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled ﬁbre content minimum.

30

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

