DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the Report of the
House of Lords Select Committee
on Communications on the
Ownership of the News
(HL 122-I) Session 2007-08

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2008

Cm 7486

£5.50

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the Report of the
House of Lords Select Committee
on Communications on the
Ownership of the News
(HL 122-I) Session 2007-08

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2008

Cm 7486

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2008
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or
agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing
it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be
acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document speciﬁed.
Where we have identiﬁed any third party copyright material you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please write to Ofﬁce of Public Sector
Information, Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or e-mail:
licensing@opsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 978 0101 7486 29

Government Response to the Report of the House of
Lords Select Committee on Communications on the
Ownership of the News (HL 122-I) Session 2007-08
Introduction
The Government welcomes the Committee’s Report on ownership of the news and is pleased to
be able to present its response.
The Government is grateful to the Committee for producing such a comprehensive examination
of the issues surrounding media ownership, the Public Interest Test and the future of public
service media content in the UK. We welcome the detailed consideration the Committee has given
to this subject and value its identiﬁcation of key issues facing us in a rapidly changing media
environment. The substantial amounts of written and oral evidence from stakeholders across a
wide range of interests that the Committee has gathered and analysed, and the well-evidenced
recommendations it has put forward, will be taken fully into account in the future development of
Government policy.
Conclusions and Recommendations
The Government’s response to the key recommendations in Chapter 9 and section 29 (which was
not included in the summary of recommendations) of the Lords’ report is set out below.
374. The relationship between policy makers and the media is a legitimate area of public
interest. We therefore propose that politicians in all parties are open and candid about their
meetings with media owners and editors. [para 197]
We note the Committee’s recommendation, which is directed to all policy makers, albeit most
pertinent in relation to Ministers. For its part, the Government will continue to aim for transparency
about meetings, their participants and content, subject to those exemptions under the Freedom of
Information Act which are necessary to protect the public interest in effective administration;
and Ministers will continue to abide by the ministerial code in their dealings with those outside
Government, including media owners.
375. We do not accept that the increase of news sources invalidates the case for special
treatment of the media through ownership regulation. There is still a danger that if media
ownership becomes too concentrated the diversity of voices available could be diminished.
[para 210]
376. An internal company structure cannot be an adequate substitute for competition law
and statutory regulation in ensuring that no single voice becomes too powerful. Regulation
to ensure a plurality of media ownership is still relevant and necessary. [para 220]
We are considering the future of ownership regulation, and how it will be challenged by the
changes in communications technologies, services, platforms and consumption that come with
convergence. In the context of this rapid change in the communications markets, there is a risk
that the ownership regulations in the Communications Act 2003 will become less ﬁt for purpose.
Ofcom will also review the Media Ownership Rules for the second time since the Communications
Act came into force – this work is due to commence shortly.
377. The public interest considerations for newspaper mergers and broadcasting and crossmedia mergers should be amended to refer speciﬁcally to a need to establish whether a
merger will impact adversely on news gathering. [para 243]

1

The Government recognises the signiﬁcant role high quality journalism plays in ensuring effective
public debate of issues and current affairs. However, we consider the current media public
interest consideration, including the considerations relating to accurate presentation of news, free
expression of opinion and sufﬁcient plurality of views in newspapers, provides a sufﬁcient basis
for dealing with this issue to the extent that it may give rise to public interest concerns.
378. The considerations set out in the Public Interest Test for newspaper mergers should be
reviewed by Ofcom. This exercise should consider the rigour of the criteria and how they can
be assessed. Conducting such a review will give Ofcom the opportunity to start building an
expertise in advance of actually having to look at a newspaper merger. [para 249]
It is the Secretary of State for Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform who must decide
whether or not to intervene in a newspaper merger on the basis of one or more of the public
interest considerations relating to newspapers speciﬁed in Sections 58(2A) and 58(2B) of the
Enterprise Act (relating to accurate presentation of news, free expression of opinion and sufﬁcient
plurality of views).
In the event of a public interest intervention in a newspaper merger, Ofcom would be responsible
for providing an initial report examining whether the merger may give rise to concerns relevant to
the public interest consideration speciﬁed in the intervention notice. Taking account of Ofcom’s
report and any other information he receives on the matter, the Secretary of State must then decide
whether or not to refer the merger to the Competition Commission for a full investigation of the
public interest issues identiﬁed.
The Government is satisﬁed that the current wording of the newspaper public interest considerations
adequately describes the public interest concerns that may potentially arise in media mergers and
are appropriate. The considerations appear to provide an adequate basis for an examination of
the relevant concerns, suitable reports to be provided and ﬁnal decisions taken about whether or
not such a merger might be detrimental to the public interest. We are therefore content with the
current text.
We are satisﬁed that Ofcom is capable of undertaking an adequate initial investigation into
newspaper mergers and providing a report that would help the Secretary of State reach a properly
informed decision on whether or not to make a reference to the Competition Commission.
379. The Government should be more ﬂexible and adopt a case-by-case approach when
considering which media mergers the Public Interest Test should apply to. We believe that it
would be essential to apply the test if a major international internet company bought a stake
in a UK news provider. [para 253]
The Communications Act 2003 provides that the Secretary of State for Business Enterprise and
Regulatory Reform may make a public interest intervention in any media merger he considers
raises issues relevant to a speciﬁed media public interest consideration. The published guidance
serves to provide an indication of the circumstances when such interventions may be likely to be
considered. This states that intervention will generally only be considered in respect of mergers
that would not have been feasible save for the fact that the Communications Act 2003 removed
certain media ownership rules. The purpose of this was to provide assurance that the power to
intervene in media mergers on public interest grounds would not result in interventions being
made in a wide range of media mergers. But the guidance does not supplant the law and should not
be taken to mean the Secretary of State is in any way precluded from intervening in any case he
considers may raise legitimate public interest issues. It provides explicitly that intervention may be
made in cases where exceptional circumstances apply. This might be considered to include cases
such as those identiﬁed by the Committee which may involve novel circumstances that may not
previously have been subject to media ownership rules. Decisions about whether to intervene in
any particular media merger must be taken on the basis of the speciﬁc circumstances of the case.

2

380. Ofcom should be given the power to initiate the Public Interest Test. This would sit
more comfortably with Ofcom’s duty to promote the interests of the citizen. The power to
trigger a Public Interest Test should not be taken away from Ministers. Along with Ofcom,
Ministers should retain the power in the event that they consider there is a risk to the public
interest that Ofcom has not fully recognised. Therefore, the power to issue an Intervention
Notice should be held by both Ofcom and the Secretary of State. [para 261]
The Government considers that the power to intervene in a media merger on public interest
grounds should remain solely with the Secretary of State. It is right that judgements about the
public interest should fall to be made by Ministers. The Committee appears to accept that the
Secretary of State should remain the ﬁnal decision maker in public interest cases. There seem
strong reasons to avoid a situation where the person responsible for issuing the intervention notice
is not the same person who would be responsible for taking ﬁnal decisions. This could introduce
unwelcome uncertainty over for the relative responsibilities of different authorities, particularly in
the context of a possible legal challenge to decisions.
The Committee appears concerned that the Secretary of State might be disinclined to use the
power to intervene in media mergers in order to avoid possible conﬂicts with media enterprises.
The decision as to whether a public interest intervention may be appropriate in any particular
case necessarily requires a judgement to be made. There is no bright line test as to when such
intervention should or should not be made. Accordingly, the Act affords the Secretary of State
a degree of latitude to reach conclusions based on his assessment of the available evidence. But
clearly, if a media merger arises that appears to engage the media public interest considerations,
the Secretary of State has a duty to give proper consideration to the case for making an intervention
and would be open to legal challenge if his decision appeared to be unreasonable.
There is nothing to preclude Ofcom from submitting views to the Secretary of State about the
prospective use of his powers to intervene in a media merger. Indeed, it is likely that the views of
Ofcom would be sought in circumstances where a merger appeared to give rise to public interest
concerns such that serious consideration of the case for making an intervention was required.
381. We recommend that legislation should be amended so that Ofcom investigates media
mergers only on the basis of the public interest criteria, and the Competition Commission
considers only the competition aspects of a merger. They should make their recommendations
separately to the Secretary of State on whether the merger should be blocked or go ahead
(with or without remedies). The Secretary of State would then have the ﬁnal responsibility
for accepting or rejecting Ofcom’s recommendations and remedies, as they relate to the
public interest criteria. As is the case now, the Secretary of State would continue to be bound
by the Competition Commission’s ﬁndings on the competition issues. [para 271]
The Government considers that the Competition Commission is well placed to consider the
competition and public interest issues arising in all mergers, including those involving enterprises
that operate within sectors that are subject to sector speciﬁc regulation. We do not believe a clear
case exists for amending the current procedures in the way the Committee suggests.
When a merger is referred to the Competition Commission, they will appoint individual members
of an investigation team. They will seek to ensure the team has the appropriate balance of skills,
experience and expertise effectively to examine the relevant facts of that merger, to rigorously
test the arguments put forward by interested parties and reach soundly based conclusions about
the impact of the merger. These capabilities are equally applicable to public interest issues as to
competition issues and to whichever sector of the economy may be affected by a merger. During
the course of an investigation, the Competition Commission may, of course, seek evidence from
appropriate sectoral regulators as necessary.

3

Even if it was practicable to give Ofcom the powers equivalent to those of the Competition
Commission such that it could conduct an investigation into public interest issues raised in media
mergers, there would seem strong reasons not to have two separate bodies conducting parallel
investigations into the same merger. It seems likely that there would be considerable overlap in the
information the bodies would require in order to undertake their separate assessments. This would
result in duplication of effort and additional burdens on parties providing evidence. There is also
likely to be a beneﬁt in one body conducting both aspects of the investigation since an assessment
of the impact of the merger on the speciﬁed public interest consideration may be signiﬁcantly
informed by a consideration of the competition issues it raises.
The Committee appears concerned at the prospect of the current process requiring two separate
investigations into the public interest issues raised by a media merger. The Committee also
expresses concern that conclusions reached by Ofcom in its report to the Secretary of State may
not necessarily be reﬂected in a ﬁnal report produced by the Competition Commission. But this is
simply a necessary and appropriate aspect of the two stage process for considering mergers.
The initial Phase I assessment of a merger is relatively quick. Its purpose is to decide whether
or not the merger can be cleared to proceed. If the conclusion is that it cannot be cleared at this
ﬁrst phase, it must be referred to the Competition Commission to conduct a more in depth second
phase investigation. In media merger public interest cases OFCOM provides a report on public
interest matters which is considered alongside the Competition Commission investigation.
In public interest cases, the Secretary of State must decide whether he has sufﬁcient reason to
make a reference to the Competition Commission on public interest grounds. He may make such
a reference if he “believes that it is or may be the case that” the public interest consideration
speciﬁed in the intervention notice is relevant to a consideration of the merger and that the merger
may be expected to operate against the public interest. To assist him in reaching that decision,
Ofcom provides an initial report considering the public interest issues that may be raised by the
merger. The OFT provides a report on the competition issues raised by the case.
If a reference is made, the purpose of that second phase investigation and report by the Competition
Commission is to enable the Secretary of State to decide whether to make an adverse public
interest ﬁnding. Such a ﬁnding is made if he decides substantively that it is indeed the case that
the public interest consideration speciﬁed in the intervention notice is relevant to a consideration
of the merger and that the merger may be expected to operate against the public interest.
It is entirely reasonable that the Competition Commission may subsequently, following in-depth
scrutiny, reach the conclusion that a merger referred to them on public interest grounds does not,
in fact raise concerns relating to the speciﬁed public interest consideration.
382. When Ofcom considers the public interest considerations of a media merger it should
be required to put the needs of the citizen ahead of the needs of the consumer. [para 275]
The Government does not propose to give Ofcom a role in conducting Phase II merger investigations.
In public interest media merger cases, ﬁnal decisions about whether a merger operates against the
public interest fall to the Secretary of State who will take into account all relevant factors.
383. We are concerned that Ofcom is inadequately implementing Section 13(3) of the
Communications Act and believe that it should review whether the Content Board has
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on Management Board decisions in respect of Ofcom’s duty to
promote the purposes of public service television as laid down by Section 3(4)(a) of the
Communications Act. Ofcom should publish the ﬁndings of this review so that they can be
acted on by Parliament if necessary. [para 279]
This is a matter for Ofcom who are responding separately to the Committee.

4

384. The analogue and digital local radio ownership rules should be amalgamated.
[para 283]
As noted by the Committee, the Government accepts that there is a case for changing the local
radio ownership rules in the light of changing media provision, including the growth of digital
radio. However, the nature of the future media landscape remains uncertain and any amalgamation
of media ownership rules needs to reﬂect a realistic assessment of the direction and pace of change.
Last year the Government established an independent working group to consider the future of
digital radio. We believe that before a decision can be made on possible amalgamation we need
to understand better how the digital radio sector will change, in particular how the balance of
listening between analogue and digital platforms may change and over what period. The Working
Group is expected to report back at the end of this year and we intend to revisit this issue in the
light of their ﬁndings and recommendations.
385. The local cross-media ownership restrictions relating to local radio and local newspaper
companies should be lifted. Ofcom must carefully monitor any local cross-media mergers
and apply the Public Interest Test if any are likely to raise public interest considerations.
[para 289]
The Government will examine the question of local cross-media ownership restrictions as part of
its wider consideration of the ownership regime referred to above.
386. The current inequitable situation facing UK companies is preventing their legitimate
expansion into new markets. The Government must continue its efforts to achieve reciprocal
rights for UK companies. Without further information it is difﬁcult to measure progress on
this matter. We recommend that the Department for Culture, Media and Sport publish an
annual report on progress towards securing reciprocal ownership rights. This should detail
the extent of ongoing negotiations with countries where the Government is seeking to achieve
reciprocal rights, and explain the reasons why ownership limits remain in place. [para 295]
As discussed during the passage of the Communications Act 2003, the Government is committed
to encouraging others to adopt reciprocal rights for UK companies. We will continue to raise
this issue where appropriate; we recognise that any changes are primarily a matter for individual
governments. We are not convinced of the merits of publishing an annual report detailing why
ownership limits remain in place.
387. The strength of BBC news is its reporters and those that support them. Between them
they provide a depth and range of news which is among the best in the world. We believe
that nothing should be allowed to reduce the BBC’s ability to sustain this high quality news
operation. [para 301]
The Government agrees with the Committee’s assessment of the strength and importance of
the BBC’s news services, which are speciﬁed as one of the elements of the BBC’s core Public
Purposes. The allocation of the BBC’s resources to its services, including to news provision, is a
matter for the BBC.
388. The BBC’s spending on the salaries of its presenters and personalities represents a
considerable proportion of the BBC’s licence-fee funded budget. The BBC Trust should
monitor closely spending growth in this area to ensure that the Corporation can adequately
fulﬁl and fund all its public purposes and particularly news and current affairs. [para 306]
The level of salaries paid to presenters is a matter for the BBC and was the subject of a recent
independent report commissioned by the BBC Trust. The report concluded that there was no
evidence of the BBC paying more than the “market price” for leading TV talent or systematically
pushing up prices in the talent market. The allocation of the BBC’s resources, within the general

5

framework of the Charter and Agreement, is a matter for the BBC and there is no provision
for Government to intervene. The BBC Trust is responsible for holding the Executive Board to
account for its performance in delivering ﬁnancial efﬁciency and value for money.
389. We emphatically believe that Public Service Broadcasting cannot be left to the BBC
alone. We are very struck by Ofcom’s prediction that by 2012/13 the BBC will receive 91%
of all PSB funding. A continuing plurality of public service broadcasters should be an aim
of public policy. This is particularly crucial for news and current affairs. Ofcom’s research
shows that the public values this plurality, especially in news. It also serves the valuable
purpose of providing competition for the BBC. We urge Ofcom to make news provision a
priority on the PSBs when it comes to negotiating future service obligations. [para 318]
390. Any residual funds left over from the BBC’s targeted help scheme should be used to
support the commercial PSBs in the medium term. [para 321]
392. We are sceptical of the various proposals that have been put forward for top slicing the
BBC licence fee. [para 323]
We note the Committee’s views and that these issues are being considered in detail by Ofcom
as part of its PSB Review. Their analysis and recommendations are being considered as part
of the Government’s own consideration of the future funding arrangements for public service
broadcasting in the United Kingdom.
391. ITV’s proposal for the abolition of the Contracts Rights Renewal system merits further
consideration. [para 322]
The Ofﬁce of Fair Trading and Ofcom are currently conducting a review of the Contract Rights
Renewal undertakings. The review will run for a year and is expected to report back early in
2009.
393. We believe there is scope in the idea of sharing BBC facilities with other public service
broadcasters and that this proposal should be further examined. The Government should
take forward this work. [para 324]
We note that the BBC records, in its submission to the Ofcom PSB Review, its commitment
to working in partnership with other broadcasters and that the BBC Chairman has asked the
Director-General to explore new ways of helping bring the beneﬁts of the BBC’s scale and public
investment to the whole sector. We look forward to the outcome of that work and do not at present
see a need for Government intervention on this speciﬁc aspect of the BBC’s proposals.
394. We remain to be convinced that the new BBC corporate governance arrangements are
more effective than those they replaced. [para 325]
The Charter review process involved extensive debate on alternative governance options for the
BBC and the Government remains of the view that the approach embodied in the new Charter is
the right one. The previous arrangements made it difﬁcult for the BBC’s Board of Governors to
represent both the public interest and the BBC executive at the same time. There was a need for
reform to establish a clearer separation of functions.
395. We are concerned about ITV’s proposals to scale back its regional news structure. Ofcom
should carefully examine whether ITV’s policy will have an impact on local newsrooms and
their ability to quickly and accurately cover stories of national importance. Ofcom should
also consider the implications that a cut in ITV regional news commitments will have on
the news gathering capabilities of ITN and in turn the overall quality of ITV and Channel 4
news. Plurality of regional television news is important and if ITV reduce their commitments
in this area the BBC will have very little effective competition. [para 332]

6

396. Ofcom should work to deﬁne more systematically “high-quality” news and to agree a
number of indicators for assessing it. Ofcom should produce an annual report monitoring
the quality and quantity of PSB news and Ofcom should also develop a mechanism for
holding companies responsible if their news falls short of quality thresholds. [para 337]
397. Ofcom should be given powers to check the resourcing of all the commercial PSB news
providers, rather than just Channel 3’s appointed news provider. Ofcom should also develop
a series of indicators against which to measure the resourcing of a news organisation and
should publish an annual report on the resourcing of all the PSB news services (this could be
published as part of the annual report on quality recommended in para 337). [para 341]
398. Ofcom should start monitoring the resourcing, quality and quantity of news on the
commercial PSB channels as soon as possible and should also start publishing an annual
report as set out above. However, in the future we believe there should be a statutory duty on
Ofcom to undertake these new duties. [para 342]
The future institutional arrangement for Public Service Broadcasting/Content provision, including
the role of Ofcom, is something that the Government is considering alongside Ofcom’s PSB review.
The Committee’s analysis of the issues and speciﬁc suggestions are a valuable contribution to that
process.
399. The impartiality requirements of PSBs are an important safeguard of the plurality of
voices heard on broadcast news. They will continue to be necessary post-digital switchover.
[para 349]
400. Any weakening of the impartiality requirements as they apply to UK broadcasters
would have a negative impact in the quality and trustworthiness of the country’s news. Such
a move would not beneﬁt the public or journalists and could run the risk of undermining the
most important medium for news. [para 353]
401. When considering how to apply the impartiality requirements to non-UK based news
broadcasters licensed in the UK, Ofcom should takes into account the size of their UK
audience. It should monitor the UK audience share of these channels and set a viewing
threshold that would guide its regulatory approach. [para 358]
The Government fully endorses the Committee’s view of the importance of the impartiality
requirements especially on PSBs, and considers them an essential part of the regulatory framework
safeguarding the informational needs of citizens. They will remain part of the regulatory framework
for television content.
However, the increasing blurring of distinctions between different media platforms will provide a
challenge for content regulation in future and we will continue to examine the implications of this
for regulation and policy.
402. The public interest would be better served by placing the BBC on a statutory footing
by an Act of Parliament. Parliament should have a greater involvement in the setting of the
licence fee. [para 363]
The Government remains of the view that the public interest is best served by establishing the BBC
with a Royal Charter. If the BBC were to be put on a statutory basis, it could well be more, not
less, vulnerable to detailed political intervention and this would be contrary to the key principle
of the BBC’s independence under the Charter arrangements. The Government concluded from the
Charter Review that a ten-year Charter would best provide the certainty and independence that the
BBC needs during a period of rapid change in broadcasting.

7

The Government considers that the present arrangements for setting the licence fee and the level
of Parliamentary involvement remain appropriate. The decision on the licence fee settlement is a
matter for Government. However, each change in the licence fee level is implemented by way of
regulations subject to the negative resolution procedure.
403. The procedure for compelling the attendance of witnesses before Committees of the
House of Lords is palpably not ﬁt for purpose at the beginning of the 21st century, and
should now be reviewed. If parliamentary inquiries are to serve a useful function in guarding
the public interest then a less cumbersome procedure is necessary. We invite the Procedure
Committee to consider the options for streamlining the procedure whereby select committees
may compel the attendance of witnesses. [para 373]
This is a matter for the Procedure Committee.
Section 29.
News aggregator sites beneﬁt from news gathering done by other organisations
but they do not invest in original content themselves. This is of justiﬁable concern and we
recommend that the Department for Culture, Media and Sport should examine the effects
of news aggregators and consider how their impact on news gathering might enhance their
investment in news.
There is a wide range of commercial relationships between news aggregators and news gatherers
and it is difﬁcult to generalise about the impact across the whole industry. However, we believe
in general that these relationships are as much to the beneﬁt of the gatherers as the aggregator.
In some cases news gathers beneﬁt from new revenues, such as direct payments for syndicated
content provided, while others use the relationship with news aggregators to build their online
brands and grow audience on their own news sites. In either case the content gatherer is under no
obligation to provide its content.

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Ofﬁce Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce
ID5940977 10/08 410329 19585
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled ﬁbre content minimum.

8

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

