The Government’s Response
to the Culture, Media and
Sport Select Committee on
Press Standards, Privacy and Libel

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
April 2010

Cm 7851

£5.75

© Crown Copyright 2010
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or agency
logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown
copyright and the title of the document specified.
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please contact the Office of Public Sector Information,
Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU
or e-mail: licensing@opsi.gsi.gov.uk.
ISBN: 9780101785129
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2358969

04/10 2844

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

THE GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE CULTURE,
MEDIA AND SPORT SELECT COMMITTEE ON ‘PRESS
STANDARDS, PRIVACY AND LIBEL’
Introduction
1.1 We are grateful to the Committee for their carefully considered report and we continue to
believe that the press benefits enormously from this sort of periodic scrutiny of their behaviour. It
enables the press to understand properly that they do not act in a vacuum, and that their behaviour
will be examined in great detail in a high profile setting.
1.2 The recommendations and commentary spanned many parts of Government, and a great many
of the recommendations raise highly detailed and technical issues. We have given these careful
consideration and our responses reflect that.
1.3 The paragraph numbers given at the end of each recommendation are those used by the Select
Committee in their report.
Privacy and Breach of Confidence
2.1 We understand that the refusal by a court to grant an injunction does not necessarily
mean the defendant can publish straightaway: if the claimant appeals the decision, then the
Court of Appeal has to hold the ring, pending the outcome of that appeal. That said, it seems to
us wrong that once an interim injunction has been either refused or granted in cases involving
the Convention right to freedom of expression a final decision should be unduly delayed.
Such delay may give an unfair advantage to the applicant for the injunction as newspapers
often rely on the currency of their articles. We recommend that the Ministry of Justice should
seek to develop a fast-track appeal system where interim injunctions are concerned, in order
to minimise the impact of delay on the media and the costs of a case, while at the same time
taking account of the entitlement of the individual claimant seeking the protection of the
courts. (Paragraph 32)
2.2 The current system allows for the urgent consideration of appeals in all civil cases, including
those where freedom of expression is concerned. As in all civil proceedings it is for the parties to
request that an appeal be dealt with according to the expedited process. Where necessary applications
can be turned around very quickly and if ordered a court can be convened even on the same day. The
decision as to whether a case will be heard urgently depends on the facts of the case in question,
allowing the flexibility to deal with circumstances which may vary widely.
2.3 The Government’s view is that the court is best placed to assess the case before it, and to
list it for hearing at an appropriate time, expedited as necessary, taking into account the specific
circumstances of that case.
2.4 Without appropriate data on injunctions we are unable to come to definitive conclusions
about the operation of section 12 of the Human Rights Act, nor do we believe that the Ministry
of Justice can effectively assess its impact. We recommend that the Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief
Justice and the courts should rectify the serious deficiency in gathering data on injunctions
and should commission research on the operation of section 12 as soon as possible. (Paragraph
37)
2.5 We do not overlook the fact that, in Cream Holdings v Bannerjee, the House of Lords held
that the effect of section 12(3) of the Human Rights Act was that, in general, no injunction
should be granted in proceedings where Article 10 was engaged unless the claimant satisfied
the court that he or she was more likely than not to succeed at trial. Although there is little
statistical evidence available, we are nevertheless concerned at the anecdotal evidence we

1

have received on this matter. Section 12 of the Human Rights Act is fundamental in protecting
the freedom of the press. It is essential that this is recognised by the Courts. (Paragraph 38)
2.6 Section 12 of the Human Rights Act 1998 reflects Parliament’s desire to underline importance
of freedom of expression and the protection afforded to it by the common law. However, section
12 does not change the balance between Article 8 (privacy) and Article 10 (freedom of expression),
which remains a matter for the courts on a case by case basis. The Government continues to believe
that a decision by a court, based on the individual facts of the case is the best way to resolve potential
tensions between privacy and freedom of expression. Freedom of expression has traditionally held
a special position in our common law and continues to do so today. The Government believes
strongly in freedom of expression and in the benefits of a free press to a democratic society. Section
12 emphasises that the traditional importance with which freedom of expression is regarded in this
country, means that the courts should have “particular regard” to it when considering granting an
injunction which would impact on the respondent’s right to freedom of expression, particularly in
the respondent’s absence.
2.7 The Government understands the argument in favour of collecting additional data on injunctions,
but needs to consider this recommendation further, including taking into account the costs that
would be involved in collecting this data.
2.8 It is entirely understandable, as news and gossip spread fast, that parties bringing privacy
(and confidence) cases may wish to bind the press in its entirety, not just a single enquiring
publication. On the face of it, however, this appears contrary to the intention behind section
12, if the press has not been given proper notice and opportunity to contest an injunction. We
recommend, therefore, that the Lord Chancellor and Lord Chief Justice also closely review
these practices. (Paragraph 39)
2.9 The Government understands the concerns which have been expressed by the Select Committee
and others regarding the press being giving proper notice of an application for an injunction and a
chance to contest it where they wish to do so in order to give the judge the benefit of argument from
both sides. At stake are the important values of open justice, freedom of speech of the press and the
privacy of individuals.
2.10 Senior officials at the Ministry of Justice have met with representatives of the press in order to
ensure that the Government has a full appreciation of their concerns. There have also been a number
of discussions between the Lord Chancellor, his officials and senior members of the judiciary.
2.11 As a result of those discussions and the Select Committee’s recommendations, the Master
of the Rolls has now set up a committee to examine these and other issues relating to the use of
injunctions which bind the press, including super-injunctions, and in particular in relation to the
issues of notice of applications and service of papers on those press organisations who are to be
bound by such injunctions. As the concerns are largely procedural in nature, it is appropriate for the
judiciary to take a lead role in this matter.
2.12 The committee, which the Master of the Rolls will chair, will contain both claimant and
defendant representatives to ensure that a balance of views is obtained; as well as senior members
of the judiciary including Lord Justice Moore-Bick, Deputy Head of Civil Justice, and Mr Justice
Tugendhat. The committee is meeting with a view to producing evidence-based recommendations
for any necessary changes to the Civil Procedure Rules and Practice Directions to ensure that these
issues are addressed. It is hoped that the committee will report in May.
2.13 The Human Rights Act has only been in force for nine years and inevitably the number
of judgments involving freedom of expression and privacy is limited. We agree with the Lord
Chancellor that law relating to privacy will become clearer as more cases are decided by
the courts. On balance we recognise that this may take some considerable time. We note,
however, that the media industry itself is not united on the desirability, or otherwise, of privacy

2

legislation, or how it might be drafted. Given the infinitely different circumstances which can
arise in different cases, and the obligations of the Human Rights Act, judges would inevitably
still exercise wide discretion. We conclude, therefore, that for now matters relating to privacy
should continue to be determined according to common law, and the flexibility that permits,
rather than set down in statute. (Paragraph 67)
2.14 The Government welcomes and shares the Select Committee’s view that there is no need to
put the law of privacy on a statutory basis.
2.15 Clearly pre-notification, in the form of giving opportunity to comment, is the norm
across the industry. Nevertheless we were surprised to learn that the PCC does not provide
any guidance on pre-notification. Giving subjects of articles the opportunity to comment is
often crucial to fair and balanced reporting, and there needs to be explicit provision in the
PCC Code itself. (Paragraph 91)
2.16 We recommend that the PCC should amend the Code to include a requirement that
journalists should normally notify the subject of their articles prior to publication, subject
to a “public interest” test, and should provide guidance for journalists and editors on prenotifying in the Editors’ Codebook. (Paragraph 92)
2.17 We have concluded that a legal or unconditional requirement to pre-notify would be
ineffective, due to what we accept is the need for a “public interest” exception. Instead we
believe that it would be appropriate to encourage editors and journalists to notify in advance
the subject of a critical story or report by permitting courts to take account of any failure
to notify when assessing damages in any subsequent proceedings for breach of Article 8. We
therefore recommend that the Ministry of Justice should amend the Civil Procedure Rules to
make failure to pre-notify an aggravating factor in assessing damages in a breach of Article
8. We further suggest that amendment to the Rules should stipulate that no entitlement to
aggravated damages arises in cases where there is a public interest in the release of that private
information. (Paragraph 93)
2.18 The Government agrees that it would be a positive and helpful step if pre-notification were
included as a standard step in the process and disciplines that journalists and editors apply as they
move towards publication. Like the Committee we recognise that such action is not always either
possible or – for reasons of public interest – desirable. However, we believe that clarification on
how to apply the principles of prior notification would be welcomed by many journalists.
2.19 The Government believes that the PCC should be given the opportunity to develop provisions
in response to the Select Committee’s other recommendations in this area before the need for any
amendments in relation to the assessment of damages are considered. In any event, the Government
considers that the changes proposed by the Select Committee are matters of substantive law and
hence could not be achieved through amending the Civil Procedure Rules, but would require primary
legislation.
2.20 The free and fair reporting of proceedings in Parliament is a cornerstone of a democracy.
In the UK, publication of fair extracts of reports of proceedings in Parliament made without
malice are protected by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840. They cannot be fettered by a
court order. However, the confusion over this issue has caused us the very gravest concern that
this freedom is being undermined. We therefore repeat previous recommendations from the
Committee on Parliamentary Privilege that the Ministry of Justice replace the Parliamentary
Papers Act 1840 with a clear and comprehensible modern statute. (Paragraph 101)
2.21 We welcome the Speaker’s determination to defend freedom of speech in Parliament, as
well as the comments by the Lord Chief Justice on the Trafigura affair, and strongly urge that
a way is found to limit the use of super-injunctions as far as is possible and to make clear that
they are not intended to fetter the fundamental rights of the press to report the proceedings

3

of Parliament. Given the importance of these issues, we hope that a clear statement regarding
the way forward is made before the end of this Parliament. (Paragraph 102)
2.22 The Government believes that freedom of speech in Parliament is fundamental and that accurate
reporting of parliamentary proceedings is essential in a democratic society. As the Committee has
stated, the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840 protects publications of extracts from or abstracts of
parliamentary reports, papers, votes or proceedings, provided that such publication is bona fide
and without malice. The Government will consider the possibility of putting the provisions of the
Parliamentary Papers Act 1840 into a modern statutory form when a legislative opportunity arises.
2.23 The Government joins the Select Committee in welcoming the comments made by the Lord
Chief Justice on the use of super-injunctions and takes seriously the concerns expressed by the
Committee over the use of super-injunctions. However, as stated by the Lord Chief Justice in his
statement, there are cases where injunctions imposing reporting restrictions, even those which
prevent the reporting of the injunction itself, are appropriate: such as in some family, fraud or
national security cases. For example, in a fraud case, reports of the mere existence of an injunction
might alert the accused’s associates, who may then dispose of their assets. The Government notes
that never has an injunction been sought or granted with the intention of preventing press reporting
of parliamentary proceedings.
2.24 The Master of the Rolls has now set up a committee to look at the issues relating to superinjunctions and other injunctions which bind the press, with a view to producing evidence-based
recommendations for any necessary changes to the Civil Procedure Rules and Practice Directions
(see above).
Libel and Press Freedom
3.1 We have received limited evidence on hearings on meaning and the extent to which they
are used. We agree, however, that any measures to provide more certainty at an earlier stage,
and which cut the enormous costs of libel cases in the UK, should be pursued more vigorously.
We urge the Government, therefore, to look closely at this aspect of procedure in its present
review of the costs and operation of UK libel laws. (Paragraph 129)
3.2 The Government shares the Committee’s view that there is a need to ensure that procedures
both before and during litigation provide as much certainty as possible at an early stage. The MOJ
Libel Working Group has considered the issue of early resolution of meaning. It identified particular
difficulties arise from the fact that currently the judge can only give a preliminary ruling on whether
the words complained of are capable of bearing a defamatory meaning, while the question of whether
the meaning is in fact defamatory is a matter for determination at trial stage by a jury (where a party
requests jury trial).
3.3 The group agreed that detailed provisions should be developed to enable both questions to be
determined at an early stage. A separate working group (the Libel CLAF group) set up in the context
of Lord Justice Jackson’s costs review produced preliminary proposals in this area, and these are
currently being developed further by a group chaired by Sir Charles Gray (the Early Resolution
Procedure Group).
3.4 The Government supports this work and will consider the proposals which emerge very
carefully.
3.5 We recognise the difficulties with the whole burden of proof being placed on the defendant
but believe, on balance, that in the interests of natural justice, defendants should be required
to prove the truth of their allegations. We are concerned, however, to see cases where that
burden becomes overly onerous. We make some recommendations in this Report regarding the
defence of ‘responsible journalism’ and the burden of proof on companies suing for defamation,
which may level the playing field and assist publication in the public interest. We also urge the

4

Government, however, to examine this aspect of the operation of the UK’s libel laws carefully,
including how the courts might better require claimants to make reasonable disclosures of
evidence, without increasing costs even further through expensive appeals. (Paragraph 135)
3.6 The Government agrees with the Committee’s conclusion that on balance defendants should be
required to prove the truth of their allegations, and that the burden of proof in this area should not
be changed. We do, however, recognise the need to ensure that procedures are fair to both parties
and that unnecessary burdens are not placed on defendants, particularly in relation to the evidence
which is provided by claimants.
3.7 The Libel Working Group recognised the difficulties that currently arise around evidential
issues, and considered whether changes could usefully be made to the Defamation Pre-Action
Protocol, which prescribes the steps that should be taken and the information that should be made
available by both parties prior to formal proceedings being issued. There was a wide divergence of
views on the Working Group on the extent to which changes to strengthen the Protocol are needed,
and what those should be.
3.8 The Government believes that there is a clear need for the Protocol to be carefully reviewed and
strengthened where appropriate to ensure that it operates effectively and fairly. Responsibility for
the civil pre-action protocols rests with the Civil Justice Council, which makes recommendations
to the Lord Chancellor and to the Civil Procedure Rule Committee. The CJC are currently in the
process of reviewing all the civil pre-action protocols, and a copy of the Working Group’s report is
being sent to the CJC so that its views can be taken into account.
3.9 The Bower case also highlights concerns which arise when judges exclude evidence which
prevents a jury being presented with a rounded picture, or too narrow a view of the thrust
of an article. This aspect of the operation of the libel laws also needs examination. (Paragraph
136)
3.10 The Government considers that the issues raised in the case of Desmond v Bower are a matter
of judicial interpretation on which it would not be appropriate for it to comment.
3.11 Much of the recent publicity given to concerns of the medical and science community
about the harmful effects of UK libel laws on their ability to comment has followed the
court rulings to date in the Simon Singh case and media coverage of the cases of the British
cardiologist Peter Wilmshurst and the Danish radiologist Henrik Thomson, who have faced
action from overseas commercial interests. (Paragraph 141)
3.12 We look forward, clearly, to the outcome of the important Simon Singh case. Even from
the limited evidence we have received, we believe that the fears of the medical and science
community are well-founded, particularly in the internet age and with the growth of ‘libel
tourism’. We urge the Government, therefore, to take account of these concerns in a review
of the country’s libel laws, in particular the issue of fair comment in academic peer-reviewed
publications. (Paragraph142)
3.13 The Government recognises the concerns that have been expressed in relation to the harmful
effects of libel laws on the medical and science community. We believe that the work which we
intend to take forward in relation to the Committee’s recommendations generally and on issues
highlighted by the Libel Working Group should help to address these concerns. We will however,
continue to keep this area under consideration, particularly in the light of the forthcoming judgment
of the Court of Appeal in the case of BCA v Singh.
3.14 We appreciate the difficulties, and costs, to date in running a Reynolds defence have meant
that it has not often been used in cases which have actually reached court. Nevertheless, we
endorse the development of a ‘responsible journalism’ defence by the courts. We particularly
welcome the House of Lords judgment in Jameel which emphasises the need for flexibility and,

5

in our view, the realistic approach the courts must bring to consideration of the defence so
that it appropriately protects the media’s freedom of expression. However, we are concerned
that the defence remains costly and therefore inaccessible to publishers with poor financial
resources. We will be making a number of recommendations on costs which we intend should
ensure access to this defence in appropriate cases. (Paragraph 161)
3.15 We are also concerned that, partly because of the lack of certainty of a Reynolds defence,
many cases have to be settled before they come to court, and that as a result there are few
opportunities for a body of case law based on Lord Hoffman’s judgment in Jameel to be
developed. Indeed, it may take decades and we are of the view that the problem is more
urgent than that, especially given the challenges facing smaller regional newspaper groups.
(Paragraph 162)
3.16 The desirability of affording greater protection to genuinely responsible journalism
begs the question of whether the law should be amended to put the Reynolds defence, or an
expanded version of it, on a statutory footing, perhaps through an amendment to the 1996
Defamation Act. However, there is a risk of unforeseen consequences. It could be maintained
that Reynolds/Jameel applied more flexibly is sufficient and we are concerned that codifying
the defence and the ‘public interest’ in law may in itself introduce rigidities or make for less
accurate reporting. However it is our opinion that there is potential for a statutory responsible
journalism defence to protect serious, investigative journalism and the important work
undertaken by NGOs. We recommend that the Government launches a detailed consultation
over potentially putting such a defence, currently available in common law, on a statutory
footing. We welcome consultations already launched by the Ministry of Justice in the field of
media law. Such a further exercise will provide an opportunity to gain more clarity and show
the Government is serious about protecting responsible journalism and investigations by the
media, authors and NGOs in the public interest. (Paragraph 163)
3.17 The Government considers that the issues raised by the Committee in this area are of
fundamental importance in ensuring that responsible journalism is able to flourish and that there is
no chilling effect on investigative journalism or the work of NGOs.
3.18 The Libel Working Group considered this area in some detail. There was a general view that
simply codifying the Reynolds guidelines would not be of value, and the group considered whether
a new statutory defence broadly in line with Reynolds but expressed much more clearly and simply
would be helpful. It recommended that the Ministry of Justice undertake further work on this.
3.19 As indicated in the Government’s announcement on 23 March, we will consider whether a
statutory defence relating to the public interest and responsible journalism can be developed in a
way which reconciles the competing interests in relation to reputation and the right to freedom of
expression.
3.20 We hope that Government measures to reduce costs and to speed up libel litigation
will help address the mismatch in resources between wealthy corporations and impecunious
defendants, along with our recommendations to widen and strengthen the application of the
responsible journalism defence. Given the reaffirmation by the House of Lords in Jameel
of the rights of companies to sue in defamation, the law could only be changed by statute, if
Parliament felt it desirable to address potential abuses of libel laws by big corporations. One
possible way of addressing the issue might be to introduce a new category of tort entitled
“corporate defamation” which would require a corporation to prove actual damage to its
business before an action could be brought. Alternatively, corporations could be forced to rely
on the existing tort of malicious falsehood where damage needs to be shown and malice or
recklessness proved. We also consider that it would be fairer to reverse the general burden of
proof in such cases. Given the seriousness of this issue, we recommend that the Government
examines closely the law as it now stands, looking also at how it operates in Australia, and

6

consults widely on the possibility and desirability of introducing such changes in the UK
through an amendment to the Defamation Act 1996. (Paragraph 178)
3.21 The Government recognises that concerns exist relating to corporations bringing libel actions.
However, it considers that a private company of whatever size has a trading or business reputation
which can be harmed by defamatory allegations, and it appears right that it should be able to pursue
an action in these circumstances.
3.22 The Government therefore does not favour an absolute bar on such actions. However, the
Committee’s suggestions relating to ways in which the right might be qualified raise a wide range
of issues, and we will give further consideration to these.
3.23 Whatever the constitutional situation, or diplomatic niceties, we believe that it is more
than an embarrassment to our system that legislators in the US should feel the need to take
retaliatory steps to protect freedom of speech from what they view as unreasonable attack
by judgments in UK courts. The Bills presented in Congress, allowing for triple damages,
were reminiscent of the 1970 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act, which was
originally aimed at tackling organised crime. As such, they clearly demonstrated the depth
of hostility to how UK courts are treating ‘libel tourism’. It is very regrettable, therefore,
that the Government has not sought to discuss the situation with their US counterparts in
Washington, or influential states such as New York and California. We urge it to do so as soon
as possible. (Paragraph 205)
3.24 The Government notes the Committee’s views, and will open an informal bilateral dialogue
with the US Department of Justice to explore our respective positions.
3.25 We welcome the Lord Chancellor’s establishment of the Working Group on Libel and the
inclusion of ‘libel tourism’ in its remit. We also agree with him that it is important to have an
evidence base for decision-making. During the course of our inquiry we asked for information
on the number of cases challenged on the grounds of jurisdiction and the success rate of such
challenges. We have been provided with no such information and it was not clear who would
be responsible for collecting it. Without reliable data it is difficult to see how the Government
can monitor the implementation of Rule 6.36 of the Civil Procedure Rules. (Paragraph 207)
3.26 We recommend that the Ministry of Justice and the Courts Service should as a priority
agree a basis for the collection of statistics relating to jurisdictional matters, including claims
admitted and denied, successful and unsuccessful appeals made to High Court judges and
cases handled by an individual judge. We further recommend that such information be
collated for the period since the House of Lords judgment in the Berezovsky case in May
2000 and is published to inform debate and policy options in this area of growing concern.
(Paragraph 208)
3.27 The Libel Working Group has recommended a range of steps which the Government intends
to undertake to address difficulties arising in relation to libel tourism, and these are set out in its
answer to the Committee’s next recommendation.
3.28 Arrangements for the gathering of information to support detailed monitoring of the impact of
these actions, and any other relevant changes to the law on libel, will be put in place on an ongoing
basis in order to assess their effectiveness and the need for any further action. The Government
believes that this represents a proportionate and practical response to the Committee’s concerns,
and that in these circumstances seeking to obtain the specific details proposed by the Committee on
a retrospective basis back to 2000 would not be appropriate.
3.29 In cases where neither party is domiciled nor has a place of business in the UK, we
believe the claimant should face additional hurdles before jurisdiction is accepted by our
courts. On balance, we believe there is sufficient evidence to show that the reputation of the

7

UK is being damaged by overly flexible jurisdictional rules and their application by individual
High Court judges, as exemplified by Mr Justice Eady in the Mardas and New York Times
case. (Paragraph 214)
3.30 We recommend that the Ministry of Justice and the Civil Justice Council consider how
the Civil Procedure Rules could be amended to introduce additional hurdles for claimants
in cases where the UK is not the primary domicile or place of business of the claimant or
defendant. We believe that the courts should be directed to rule that claimants should take
their case to the most appropriate jurisdiction (ie the primary domicile or place of business
of the claimant or defendant or where the most cases of libel are alleged to have been carried
out). (Paragraphs 215)
3.31 The Government acknowledges the concerns that have been expressed that London has
become the forum of choice for those who wish to sue for libel and that this is having a “chilling
effect” on freedom of expression.
3.32 The Libel Working Group considered this issue in detail. To the extent that there was a view
that there is a problem to be addressed, it considered that tightening and more rigorous application
of the rules/practice relating to service out of the jurisdiction in defamation cases would be useful
in order to head off inappropriate cases at the earliest possible stage, and that the critical issue is
enabling courts at an early stage to identify cases which constitute an abuse and where no real and
substantial tort has been committed within the jurisdiction.
3.33 We believe that the Working Group’s proposals in this area will provide effective practical
benefits to address problems relating to the issue of libel tourism, and intend to raise them with the
Civil Procedure Rule Committee and encourage the Committee to consider them as soon as possible.
We will monitor the effectiveness of any procedural changes agreed by the Civil Procedure Rule
Committee and any other relevant changes to the law on libel, and consider the need for legislative
change in the event that problems continue to be experienced. It is hoped that this approach meets
the concerns articulated by the Committee on this important issue.
3.34 It is clear that a balance must be struck between allowing individuals to protect their
reputations and ensuring that newspapers and other organisations are not forced to remove
from the internet legitimate articles merely because the passage of time means that it would
be difficult and costly to defend them. We welcome the Lord Chancellor’s consultation and
look forward to his conclusions. As a general consideration, we believe it would be perverse if
any recommendations increased the uncertainty faced by publishers under the UK’s already
restrictive libel laws. (Paragraph 229)
3.35 In order to balance these competing concerns, we recommend that the Government
should introduce a one year limitation period on actions brought in respect of publications
on the internet. The limitation period should be capable of being extended if the claimant can
satisfy the courts that he or she could not reasonably have been aware of the existence of the
publication. After the expiry of the one year limitation period, and subject to any extension,
the claimant could be debarred from recovering damages in respect of the publication. The
claimant would, however, be entitled to obtain a court order to correct a defamatory statement.
Correction of false statements is the primary reason for bringing a defamation claim. Our
proposal would enable newspapers to be financially protected in some degree from claims
against which the passage of time may make establishing a defence difficult. (Paragraph 230)
3.36 We have also received evidence that electronic archives should be protected by ‘qualified
privilege’. This issue is explored by the consultation, with a one year limitation period suggested,
unless the publisher has not amended or flagged the online version in response to a complaint.
We agree. This would take into account views expressed by the ECtHR in Times Newspapers

8

v UK, regarding the increasing importance of online archives for education and research in
modern times. (Paragraph 231)
3.37 The Government welcomes the Committee’s views, and its recognition of the need to strike
a balance between the interests of claimants in being able to protect their reputation and those of
defendants in being protected from potentially open-ended liability.
3.38 In the light of the responses received to its consultation paper ‘Defamation and the Internet:
the Multiple Publication Rule’, and the views expressed by the Select Committee and the Libel
Working Group, the Government considers that it is appropriate to introduce a single publication
rule, whereby a defamation claim will have to be brought within one year from the date of the
original publication, subject to a discretion to the court to extend this period as necessary. Further
consideration will be given to the detailed provisions to govern the operation of the single publication
rule.
3.39 The evidence we have heard leaves us in no doubt that there are problems which urgently
need to be addressed in order to enable defamation litigation costs to be controlled more
effectively. We find the suggestion that the problem confronting defendants, including the
media, who wish to control their costs can be solved by settling cases more promptly to be
an extraordinary one. If a defendant is in the right, he should not be forced into a settlement
which entails him sacrificing justice on the grounds of cost. (Paragraph 262)
3.40 We are aware that machinery exists for defendants to protect their position as to costs by
making a payment into court. It does not appear to us that this machinery effectively protects
a defendant, who genuinely attempts to settle a claim at an early stage, against a determined
and deep-pocketed litigant. This is another issue which needs to be addressed by the Ministry
of Justice. (Paragraph 263)
3.41 The Government has been concerned for some time about the impact of high costs in defamation
proceedings on the publication decisions of the media and others and has already taken a number
of steps aimed at controlling these costs. In particular on 1 October 2009 the Ministry of Justice
implemented a package of measures to reduce costs associated with after the event (ATE) insurance
premiums and a 12 month mandatory costs budgeting pilot. In announcing these measures, Ministers
indicated that these were only the first steps and that the Government would continue to consider
what further measures may be necessary to control costs in this area.
3.42 In January this year we published the consultation paper, ‘Controlling Costs in Defamation
Proceedings: Reducing Conditional Fee Agreement Success Fees.’ This paper sought views on
reducing the success fees in defamation related proceedings to 10%. On 3 March the Government
announced its decision to implement the proposal. The Conditional Fee Agreements (Amendment)
Order 2010 – a Statutory Order which is subject to affirmative procedure – to achieve this change
was laid before Parliament on 3 March. The matter has recently been debated in Parliament.
3.43 The Government is actively assessing the implications of Lord Justice Jackson’s report,
Review of Civil Litigation Costs: Final Report. It will inevitably take some time to assess the full
and widespread impact of Sir Rupert’s recommendations. We will also give careful consideration to
the Committee’s report and recommendations in considering any proposals for longer term reform.
However, in the meantime, the Government is urgently seeking to reduce the maximum CFA success
fee in defamation related proceedings to 10% as an interim measure so that the specific concerns
around high costs in these cases can be addressed as quickly as possible
3.44 Mandatory universal costs capping, if implemented in isolation, is too crude an instrument
to introduce greater discipline while preserving flexibility and access to justice. We therefore
welcome the costs budgeting pilot which has the potential to impose greater discipline on
those incurring costs. Without such discipline, no cost control methods are likely to succeed.
We also welcome Lord Justice Jackson’s proposal that there should be a more interventionist

9

approach to controlling costs by the courts. Nevertheless, we recommend that costs capping
should remain as a remedy to be used in those cases where parties cannot agree a way to make
costs budgeting work. (Paragraph 274)
3.45 The Government supports Lord Justice Jackson’s proposals for a more interventionist
approach to controlling costs by the courts. However, before deciding whether to continue the costs
budgeting arrangements currently being piloted for defamation proceedings we will need to consider
the outcomes of the pilot which we have committed to review after 6 months. Rules setting out
the procedure and criteria for costs capping orders to be made were included in the Civil Procedure
Rules with effect from 6 April 2009. These rules will continue to apply in defamation proceedings
as in all other civil proceedings. However, as indicated in the response to the consultation paper
‘Controlling Costs in Defamation Proceedings’1 we are continuing to monitor its operation and in
particular whether the exceptionality test in that rule is working as intended.
3.46 The offer of amends procedure was intended to provide a simple and effective way of
acknowledging a mistake, and putting it right at minimal cost to both parties by means of
an apology, payment of moderate compensation and suitable costs. Whatever the rights and
wrongs of the individual case, headline figures for costs such as those incurred by the Guardian
in the Tesco case simply undermine Parliament’s purpose in introducing the offer of amends
procedure. (Paragraph 279)
3.47 As noted above, the Government has been concerned for some time about the impact of high
costs in defamation proceedings and is determined to take action to control those costs. The reviews
undertaken by this Committee and Lord Justice Jackson have been enormously helpful in examining
the evidence and insightful recommendations for reform in the area of defamation. The Government
is now assessing the impact of these recommendations and will make an announcement on the way
forward in due course.
3.48 Within the context of more active case management by the courts, we can see merit in
the proposal that there should be some limitation on the maximum hourly rates that can be
recovered from the losing party in defamation proceedings. This should have a significant
impact on costs across the board. While we note the difficulties identified by the Advisory
Committee on Civil Costs, we agree with the Ministry of Justice that it should reconsider this
issue now that Lord Justice Jackson’s final report has been published. (Paragraph 285)
3.49 We indicated in the response to the consultation paper ‘Controlling Costs in Defamation
Proceedings’1 that this issue could be reconsidered in the light of recommendations arising from
Lord Justice Jackson’s review of the costs of civil litigation and are content to agree the Committee’s
recommendation.
3.50 Although some have suggested that CFAs should be means-tested, in practice, given the
high costs involved, this would be likely to result in access to justice being limited to the
extremely poor and the super rich. The complexities involved also do not lend themselves to
a simple or proportionate solution. We therefore do not support the introduction of meanstesting for CFAs. (Paragraph 292)
3.51 The Government agrees with the Committee’s view that means testing for CFAs is
inappropriate.
3.52 We welcome steps taken so far to limit recoverability of After The Event insurance
premiums in publication proceedings. However, we agree with Lord Justice Jackson that
ATE premiums should become wholly irrecoverable. The fact that it is possible for insurance

1
CP4/09 Published on 24 September 2009 and available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/consultations/controlling-costs-indefamation-proceedings.htm

10

companies to offer ATE insurance at no cost to the policy holder, whether they win or lose
their case, is extraordinary and discredits the principle on which ATE insurance is based.
We recommend that the Ministry of Justice should implement his recommendations in this
respect. (Paragraph 306)
3.53 Whilst we can see strong arguments for abolishing the recoverability of ATE insurance as
recommended by the Committee and Lord Justice Jackson, as part of a package of CFA reform, such
a recommendation has potentially far reaching implications across a wide area of civil litigation,
including for access to justice. The Government believes it is important to complete a full analysis
of the impact of such reform before making a decision.
3.54 All the evidence we have heard leads us to conclude that costs in CFA cases are too
high. We also believe that CFA cases are rarely lost, thereby undermining the reasons for the
introduction of the present scheme. However it is vital to the maintenance of press standards
that access to justice for those who have been defamed is preserved. We do not agree with the
Ministry of Justice that the maximum level of success fees should be capped at 10%, nor do we
believe that success fees should become wholly irrecoverable from the losing party. However
we would support the recoverability of such fees from the losing party being limited to 10% of
costs leaving the balance to be agreed between solicitor and client. This would address the key
issue and seems to us to provide a reasonable balance, protecting access to justice, adequately
compensating solicitors for the risks taken, giving claimants and their lawyers, in particular,
a strong incentive to control costs and ensuring that costs to a losing party are proportionate.
(Paragraph 307)
3.55 The Government agrees with the Committee’s conclusion that the CFA costs in this area are
too high. It is noted that the Committee does not agree with the Ministry of Justice’s proposal to
reduce the success fee that can be charged in defamation cases to 10%. However, it is an interim
measure that can be implemented quickly to address immediately the concerns around high costs,
while we consider the recommendations of the Committee and Lord Justice Jackson in detail for the
longer term reform of CFAs in this area.
3.56 This is by no means the first time that attempts have been made to control the costs of
civil litigation. The Government must ensure that this time measures are effective. Equally, it
will be important that the impact of such measures in practice is systematically monitored so
that any necessary adjustments can be made. (Paragraph 308)
3.57 Previous attempts to control the success fees have proved unfruitful. For example during
2007 the Department published a consultation paper, Conditional Fee Agreements in Defamation
Proceedings: Success Fees and After the Event Insurance, on a scheme of fixed recoverable staged
success fees and ATE insurance premiums. However, there was no consensus on the details of the
scheme and it could not be implemented. One of the key difficulties in this area is the reluctance of
solicitors and others involved in defamation proceedings to make available objective and verifiable
evidence on which the effect of new measures can be monitored. However, we will work with
stakeholders on how best to assess the impact of the measures that are now implemented.
3.59 Lawyers must also play their part. Just as the press must be accountable for what it writes,
lawyers must be accountable for the way in which cases are run, and that includes costs. The
current costs system, especially the operation of CFAs, offers little incentive for either lawyers
or their clients to control costs, rather the contrary. It also leads to claims being settled where
they lack merit. We hope that the combined effect of our recommendations, the Ministry of
Justice consultations and the conclusions of Lord Justice Jackson, will provide the impetus for
a fairer and more balanced approach to costs in publication proceedings. (Paragraph 309)
3.60 The Government is committed to resolving the problem of high costs in defamation proceedings.
It is grateful to the Committee and to Lord Justice Jackson for their thorough review of the issues

11

and their resulting recommendations for reform. These recommendations are not wholly in concert
and it is therefore even more important to analyse their impact before making any final decisions.
We look forward to working with the judiciary and members of the legal profession to monitor the
effect of measures introduced in due course.
Press Standards
4.1 Misleading headlines can cause harm and are poor journalism, but we recognise the
difficulty the courts must face in drawing distinctions between messages conveyed in headlines
and in articles and weighing their relative impact. We feel the PCC, for its part, could more
do to address the problem of headlines than offer brief guidance in its Editors’ Codebook. We
recommend that the PCC Code itself should be amended to include a clause making clear that
headlines must accurately reflect the content of the articles they accompany. (Paragraph 332)
4.2 It tends to be the nature of headlines that they are often more sensational than the articles
underneath them. While the desire to catch the attention of readers is of course both understandable
and reasonable, it is wrong if a headline is unfair or inaccurate. And sometimes, the headline is the
only thing that is seen or sticks in the mind. It is important for readers not to take isolated lines out
of context, but responsible use of headlines has a role to play in ensuring that that does not happen.
We believe that guidance on this point would be helpful to many.
4.3 We have sympathy with the views of PAPYRUS but consider that a complete ban on
the reporting of the method of suicide would have a negative impact on the freedom of the
press. For reasons which we detail below, we do not believe that the guidance contained in the
PCC Code on suicide reporting should be altered, but rather that the PCC needs to enforce
compliance with the Code as it stands. (Paragraph 380)
4.4 Like the Committee, the Government recognises the good work the PCC has done around
this issue. But, we do believe that some elements of the press would benefit from more forceful
interventions from the PCC both on this issue and more generally.
4.5 We recommend that the PCC should not wait for people who find themselves suddenly
thrust into the media glare in traumatic circumstances to come to it, but should take more
steps to ensure that such people are aware of its services. This could perhaps most easily be
achieved through dedicated and compulsory training of coroners and police family liaison
officers about ways in which the PCC can help and through providing them with standard
leaflets which can be offered to those with whom they come into contact. (Paragraph 392)
4.6 The Government is aware that the PCC has been carrying out much good work in raising
awareness of its existence and role across the country and in different communities. We know that
the PCC regards this as an important aspect of its work and therefore have every confidence that the
PCC will continue to work on raising its profile and ensuring that access to its services increases,
and we would certainly encourage the PCC to do so.
4.7 The coverage of suicide in the media is one of the most sensitive areas that falls into the
PCC’s remit. We note the good work the PCC did in Bridgend from May 2008, although we
believe the PCC should have acted sooner and more proactively. (Paragraph 395)
4.8 The PCC Code provides suitable guidance on suicide reporting, but in our view the PCC
should be tougher in ensuring that journalists abide by it. The experience of Bridgend shows
the damage that can be caused if irresponsible reporting is allowed to continue unchecked;
the PCC needs to monitor the conduct of the journalists and the standard of coverage in such
cases. (Paragraph 396)
4.9 In common with the Committee we note the PCC’s work in this area. We also note that in
assessing the issues around reporting in Bridgend, we now all have the benefit of hindsight in
identifying the problem areas. It is important to recognise that this would not have been such an

12

easy process at the time. Nonetheless, there are certainly lessons for the PCC and the industry to
learn, and we share the Committee’s view that the PCC should keep a close eye on standards of
reporting in this area.
4.10 The Editor’s Codebook refers to complaints about newspaper websites, making clear
that editors are responsible for “any user-generated material that they have decided to leave
online, having been made aware of it, or received a complaint.” We believe this does not
go far enough, with respect to moderating comment on stories about personal tragedies, in
particular. The Codebook should be amended to include a specific responsibility to moderate
websites and take down offensive comments, without the need for a prior complaint. We also
believe the PCC should be proactive in monitoring adherence, which could easily be done by
periodic sampling of newspaper websites, to maintain standards. (Paragraph 398)
4.11 Of course newspapers need to monitor user-generated content on their websites, just as they
monitor the content over which they have editorial control, not least because they leave themselves
open to a libel action if they do not. However, there is a need to exercise some caution in saying
that newspapers should remove “offensive” comments as there can be a legitimate freedom of
expression argument for making and allowing a comment that might be offensive to some people.
However, we would like to see the PCC taking steps to satisfy itself that newspapers have proper
arrangements in place for ensuring that the tenets of the Code are followed, even on internet usergenerated content.
4.12 We recommend that Section 1 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act is amended
to cover all hacking of phone messages. (Paragraph 466)
4.13 Two prosecutions were successfully brought under RIPA, for unlawful interception. The police
have highlighted the difficulties that they experienced in bringing further prosecutions. The police
have a range of powers available to deal with data theft. However, we are studying the findings of
the Committee carefully and will not hesitate to change legislation if needed.
4. 14 In 2006 the Metropolitan Police made a considered choice, based on available resources,
not to investigate either the holding contract between Greg Miskiw and Glenn Mulcaire, or
the “for Neville” email. We have been told that choice was endorsed by the CPS. Nevertheless
it is our view that the decision was a wrong one. The email was a strong indication both
of additional lawbreaking and of the possible involvement of others. These matters merited
thorough police investigation, and the first steps to be taken seem to us to have been obvious.
The Metropolitan Police’s reasons for not doing so seem to us to be inadequate. (Paragraph
467)
4.15 While any criminal investigation is wholly a matter for the responsible police force, this appears
to have been a complex and technically difficult investigation presenting a number of challenges to
the police and prosecutors.
4.16 The Metropolitan Police have explained that the investigation and subsequent prosecution
of Clive Goodman & Glen Mulcaire was undertaken in collaboration with the Crown Prosecution
Service with the benefit of advice from leading Queen’s Counsel. The final indictment was the
subject of careful deliberation and the matters thereon were selected so as to represent the full
range of criminality committed and to attract the maximum penalty, if proven. This dictated the
investigative strategy, the parameters set and selection of victims.
4.17 In the opinion of the police, with the benefit of hindsight, it is possible that more could
have been done to explore other avenues of inquiry, but at the time and given its technical nature;
the available evidence; and in order to make best use of Police resources and public money, the
investigation was focused to meet the joint prosecution strategy. All material was reviewed by the
Police, the Crown Prosecution Service and Counsel as part of their legal obligations.

13

4.18 The original investigation was an operational matter in which Ministers had no role and it
would not be appropriate to seek to substitute any judgement informed by hindsight for that of the
police and prosecutors at the time.
4.19 We have been surprised by the confusion and obfuscation in the Information
Commissioner’s Office about the format of the information it holds, and to whom that
information has been released. Given our interest in the ledgers, and the visit of our Chairman
to the offices of the Information Commissioner to inspect them, we would have expected to be
told that the information was available in an electronic format. As such, it could easily have
been redacted to give more information about suspect activities than appeared in 2006 in
What price privacy now? (Paragraphs 484)
4.20 The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) regulates and administers the Data Protection
Act 1998 (DPºA) and Freedom of Information Act 2000 independently of Government.
4.21 In line with its legal obligations and duties, the ICO has a range of powers to deal with
breaches of and non-compliance with the DPA and plays a vital role in upholding individuals’ rights
under the Act.
4.22 The question of whether there should be custodial sentences for breaches of section 55 of
the Data Protection Act is not a new one. We recommended in our 2007 report Self-regulation
of the press that custodial sentences be used as a deterrent and were disappointed at the
Government’s rejection of our recommendation. However, we welcome the current Ministry
of Justice consultation on the introduction of sentences and hope that a subsequent change in
the law is imminent. (Paragraph 490)
4.23 The consultation on the introduction of custodial sentences for offences under section 55 of
the Data Protection Act 1998 has now closed. The Government is considering the responses to the
consultation and will make an announcement in due course.
4.24 We recognise the value of the work of the Office of the Information Commissioner in
investigating the activities of Steven Whittamore and his associates. The Office can take much
of the credit for the fact that such illegal blagging, described to us in 2007 as being widespread
across the newspaper industry, is now rare. However we are disappointed that the then
Information Commissioner did not feel he had the resources to identify and inform all those
who were or could have been the victim of illegal blags, and that he did not at the time make
the case that he should be given such resources. (Paragraph 491)
4.25 The ICO’s data protection work is funded by the annual notification fees paid by data controllers.
The Government commenced regulations in October 2009 to introduce a new tiered notification fee
structure to increase the funding available for the ICO’s data protection activities.
4.26 Discretion over how and where to exercise its powers rests with the ICO. However, the ICO
has stated that individuals concerned that they might have been affected by the alleged offences can
approach the Office for advice on this issue.
4.27 We are encouraged by the assurances that we have received that such practices are now
regarded as wholly unacceptable and will not be tolerated. We have seen no evidence to suggest
that activities of this kind are still taking place and trust that this is indeed the case. However,
we call on the Information Commissioner, the PCC and the industry to remain vigilant and to
take swift and firm action should any evidence emerge of such practices recurring. (Paragraph
494)
4.28 We are pleased to note that the Committee has found no evidence that telephone hacking by
the press is continuing. We do of course fully endorse the Committee’s calls for vigilance in respect
of this disgraceful practice.

14

Self-regulation of the Press
5.1 We acknowledge that the PCC itself has attempted to address the issue of ensuring that it
is seen to be independent, increasing the number of lay members of the PCC to 10 as against
seven industry members. However, we believe that more needs to be done to enhance the
credibility of the PCC to the outside world. We recommend that the membership of the PCC
should be rebalanced to give the lay members a two thirds majority, making it absolutely
clear that the PCC is not overly influenced by the press. We further recommend that there
should be lay members on the Code Committee, and that one of those lay members should be
Chairman of that Committee. In addition to editors of newspapers and magazines, practising
journalists should be invited to serve on the PCC’s Committees. (Paragraph 542)
5.2 We agree with the Committee that an increase in the number of lay members would enhance
the PCC’s credibility. For self-regulation to work it must have the confidence of the public. Whilst
it remains valuable for the PCC to continue to have access to the knowledge and expertise of those
with hands-on experience of working in the industry, increasing the proportion of lay members on
the Commission is not incompatible with this and would serve to increase public confidence.
5.3 The Government recognises that this is a system of self-regulation, but to have lay members on
the Code Committee would send a very important signal to the public that wider views are being
fed in to the press on what is - and, more importantly, what is not - acceptable.
5.4 Given their practical day-to-day experience and expertise, the involvement of practising
journalists would undoubtedly add an additional and valuable dimension to the PCC’s proceedings,
and we would therefore want to encourage the Commission to give serious consideration to the
Committee’s recommendation.
5.5 If the appointment and subsequent activities of the press members of the PCC are not
transparent, then its activities will be little understood by the public. As a matter of best
practice, information on all appointments to the PCC, as well as any rotation or dismissal of
members, should be made available via the PCC’s website as soon they occur and contained
within the PCC’s Annual Report. (Paragraph 543)
5.6 The PCC already seems to comply with this recommendation.
5.7 The failure of the PCC to prevent or at least limit the irresponsible reporting that
surrounded the McCann and Bridgend cases has undermined the credibility of press selfregulation. In future the Commission must be more proactive. If there are grounds to believe
that serial breaches of the Code are occurring or are likely to occur, the PCC must not wait
for a complaint before taking action. That action may involve making contact with those
involved, issuing a public warning or initiating an inquiry. We recommend that such action
should be mandatory once three or more members of the Commission have indicated to the
Chairman that they believe it would be in the public interest. (Paragraph 552)
5.8 We agree with the Committee that proactivity by the PCC should be a key component of its
work in preventing breaches. It is for the PCC to consider how exactly it conducts itself, but it
would seem odd not to launch an inquiry if three or more Commissioners believed it necessary.
5.9 We have concluded that there must be some incentive for newspapers to subscribe to the
self-regulatory system. Without such an incentive for publications to join and remain in the
PCC, the system is too precarious. We recommend that the Government consider whether
proposals to reduce the cost burden in defamation cases should only be made available to
those publications which provide the public with an alternative route of redress through their
membership of the PCC. (Paragraph 558)
5.10 We will give careful consideration to this recommendation alongside the Committee’s other
recommendations for reform of the costs regime for defamation proceedings set out at Chapter 5 of
the Committee’s report.
15

5.11 We welcome Peter Hill’s decision to include adherence to the PCC Code in the contract
of journalists who work at the Daily Express. We are disappointed that our previous
recommendation on this matter was not acted on across the industry. We therefore recommend
that the PCC should mandate the inclusion of a clause requiring respect for the Code in staff
contracts of journalists of all subscribing publications. (Paragraph 560)
5.12 The Government sees the positive case for including a clause requiring respect for the Code
in the contracts issued to all journalists. We would therefore want to encourage the PCC to work
with subscribing publications on how best to ensure that journalists as well as editors abide by the
Code.
5.13 Controversy over the PCC’s complaints activity arises in part from the manner in
which the PCC presents its complaints statistics in its annual and biannual reports, and we
recommend that the PCC should conduct a review of this matter with a view to ensuring
maximum clarity. (Paragraph 568)
5.14 In particular, contacts from members of the public which are not followed up with the
appropriate documentation should not be considered as true complaints. Including them in
headline complaints totals (quoted frequently by both the PCC and its critics) is unhelpful to
the public and we recommend that a different formula be found for presenting them in the
statistical sections of PCC publications. (Paragraph 569)
5.15 We agree with the Committee that clarity is obviously something to be sought in the presentation
of any statistical evidence. We know the PCC is keen to demonstrate the extent of its operations and
its effectiveness, and we feel sure the Commission will want to consider carefully how it can best
improve the data it issues in respect of its activities.
5.16 The printing of corrections and apologies should be consistent and needs to reflect the
prominence of the first reference to the original article. Corrections and apologies should be
printed on either an earlier, or the same, page as that first reference, although they need not
be the same size. Newspapers should notify the PCC in advance of the proposed location and
size of a correction or apology; if the PCC indicates that the requirement for ‘due prominence’
has not been fulfilled and the paper takes no remedial action, then this non-compliance should
be noted as part of the published text of the correction or apology. We recommend that this
should be written into clause one of the PCC Code. (Paragraph 573)
5.17 We agree with the Committee that the positioning and prominence of corrections and apologies
plays an important part in establishing confidence in self-regulation. This is a simple way in which
the industry could show that it has a clear understanding of the public’s expectations. Interventions
like this do much to bolster the reputation of self-regulation. We agree that having the requirement
written into the Code would add clarity and demonstrate the industry’s commitment to regulate
itself properly
5.18 In order to command public confidence that its rulings are taken seriously by the press,
we believe that, in cases where a serious breach of the Code has occurred, the PCC should have
the ability to impose a financial penalty. The industry may see giving the PCC the power to
fine as an attack on the self-regulatory system. The reverse is true. We believe that this power
would enhance the PCC’s credibility and public support. We do not accept the argument that
this would require statutory backing, if the industry is sincere about effective self-regulation it
can establish the necessary regime independently. In the most serious of cases, the PCC should
have the ultimate power to order the suspension of printing of the offending publication for
one issue. This would not only represent a major financial penalty, but would be a very visible
demonstration of the severity of the transgression. (Paragraph 575)
5.19 We agree with the Committee that the imposition of fines or suspension would not require
legislation, but it could present a number of practical challenges.

16

5.20 However, the PCC will appreciate that the absence of any severe penalties for breaching
the Code is a constant source of criticism of the self-regulatory regime, and the Committee’s
recommendation goes to the heart of these concerns. We would therefore want to encourage the
PCC and the industry to consider urgently how a system that answers these criticisms might be
introduced. A system that demonstrably penalised publications for severe breaches of the Code
would not only deter breaches from occurring, but would also send a powerful signal that would
boost public confidence in the self-regulatory regime.
5.21 It is vital that both the press and the public understand that the PCC is more than
a complaints handling body, and that it has responsibility for upholding press standards
generally. To this end, we recommend that the PCC should be renamed the Press Complaints
and Standards Commission. Further, in order to equip it more fully to discharge this remit, we
recommend that the PCC should appoint a deputy director for standards. It may be desirable
for the person appointed to have direct experience of the newspaper industry; we recommend
that this should be permitted. (Paragraph 576)
5.22 We agree that as the PCC does much more than just respond to complaints, it should give
serious consideration to a name that reflects more clearly its remit, aims and activities.
Conclusion
6.1 As the Committee itself has noted, this was a complex and wide-ranging inquiry which resulted
in an array of complex and wide-ranging recommendations. At the heart of them is the Committee’s
recognition that freedom of the press is one of the cornerstones of our democracy. We appreciate
that the Committee has sought to keep this fundamentally important point at the centre of their
inquiry, and agree with them that this is a consideration we should all keep in mind.
6.2 However, the press must also recognise that the freedom it enjoys must be balanced with a
number of responsibilities. Those responsibilities are set out in the Code of Practice, overseen by
the Press Complains Commission. The press have to understand that we – and the public – expect
them to abide by not just the word of that Code of Practice, but also its spirit. That is the best
possible thing they can do to preserve their freedom and to protect against calls for restrictions. We
hope that they will take their responsibilities as seriously as they do their rights.
6.3 It will be clear to all that the Committee’s report poses extremely serious questions for News
International. To have a journalist flouting not just industry standards but the law of the land rocks
the balance of regulation that has served us well in this country. It is also a matter of concern that
the Committee felt that witnesses from News International were reluctant to provide the detailed
information they expected. This is disappointing, and we urge News International and all other
press organisations to cooperate fully with any future inquiries, as these play an important role in
providing the scrutiny that the balance of regulation requires.
6.4 We know that the Press Complaints Commission is already looking at the recommendations
directed at its role. The Commission - and the wider industry – must consider these carefully and
recognise that the need to instil public confidence remains key.

17

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Tel 028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401

