Government Response
to the House of Commons
Culture, Media and Sport
Committee Report
on the Licensing Act 2003
Session 2008-2009

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
July 2009

Cm 7684

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2009
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or agency
logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context.The material must be acknowledged as Crown
copyright and the title of the document speciﬁed.
Where we have identiﬁed any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please write to Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information,
Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or
e-mail: licensing@opsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 978 0 10 176842 9

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE CULTURE,
MEDIA AND SPORT COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE
LICENSING ACT 2003
Introduction
The Government welcomes the publication of the report by the House of Commons Culture, Media
and Sport Committee on the Licensing Act 2003. The report provides a welcome overview of how
the Licensing Act has bedded down three and a half years after it was implemented.
The Government welcomes the Committee’s view that the Act has broadly been a success and its
recognition of the signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation and improvement to the licensing process that the Act
has made by bringing together parts of what was previously a highly complicated and bureaucratic
system. We were particularly pleased to note the Committee’s recognition that the Licensing Act has
supported the development of a greater diversity of types of premises on the high street – a central
aim of the legislation.
As with all new legislation, the Government is committed to monitoring the effects of the new
licensing regime and to making improvements where necessary. Since the Act came into force
in November 2005, the Government has worked in partnership with enforcement agencies, local
authorities and representatives of stakeholders, both voluntary and commercial, to achieve this. In
keeping with the Government’s Better Regulation agenda, the Department for Culture, Media and
Sport (DCMS) has developed, and is currently implementing, a number of deregulatory measures.
The Committee has picked up on many of the activities we are implementing or plan to undertake in
the future to help the Act to work as efﬁciently and effectively as possible for all, whilst continuing to
provide the necessary public protection. The Committee heard evidence from many of our partners
and the Committee’s report contains several practical and helpful recommendations.
This document sets out the Government’s ofﬁcial response to the Committee’s examination of the
Licensing Act 2003. Due to the wide ranging nature of the Licensing Act 2003, this response has been
compiled across several Government Departments together with input from representatives of the
enforcement agencies and local authorities. We have carefully considered all of the recommendations
made by the Committee. Inevitably, it has not been possible to agree to all of the recommendations,
but we are pleased to be able to accept or partially accept the majority of the 26 recommendations
made. There are also several recommendations that we feel are not appropriate to introduce at the
present time, but which we will continue to monitor for the future.
Response to recommendations
Recommendation 1:
We recommend that the Government should, in conjunction with local authorities, licence
applicants and other stakeholders, evaluate the licensing forms with the aim of making them
more user friendly and reducing the level of error. The Government should also remind local
authorities that licensing applications containing minor factual errors should be amended not
rejected. (Paragraph 13)
The Government agrees with the aim of this recommendation and is committed to reducing
unnecessary bureaucracy. As part of our commitment to continue delivering administrative savings,
DCMS published its third Simpliﬁcation Plan in December 2008. This includes a series of measures
to remove burdens and irritations from the various application processes required under the 2003
Act. These are: to reduce the length and simplify application forms; to make electronic forms a
reality and; to create cheaper and more effective advertising requirements. We are in the process of
consulting with key stakeholders to scope options on electronic forms and hope to put the proposals
out for formal consultation later this year.
1

The Department has already taken action to make it clear that applications should not be rejected
because of minor errors. The then Minister for Licensing wrote to all licensing authorities in August
2005, before the new regime came into force about this point.1 Further, the statutory guidance
issued under section 182 of the 2003 Act was revised in 2007 to include a speciﬁc recommendation
that forms should not be returned if they contain obvious and minor factual errors that can easily be
amended. The Local Authorities Coordinators of Regulatory Services (LACORS) have also issued
similar advice to licensing authorities. The Government has no plans to issue any further reminders,
as the position is clearly set out in the Guidance. However, we will consider, when revising forms,
how to minimise the scope for errors.
Recommendation 2:
We note that the Government has previously considered the issue of fees being charged to
not-for-proﬁt and sporting clubs for premises licences, and the conclusions of the Independent
Fees Review Panel on this matter. We accept that the cost of alcoholic drinks should not
be subsidised by the Government. However it seems to us highly unsatisfactory that such
clubs, with modest turnover and laudable aims, should be treated in exactly the same way as
commercial operations. This is especially so in the case of sports clubs. We recommend that in
the case of not-for-proﬁt clubs only the bar area should be taken into account when assessing
the rateable value of the premises for the purposes of determining the appropriate licensing
fee. We further recommend that all sports clubs, regardless of whether they are registered
CASCs, be placed in a fee band based upon 20% of their rateable value. (Paragraph 26)
The Government recognises the unique nature of sports clubs and not-for proﬁt clubs and we have
considered several initiatives to support community groups and grass roots and community sports.
However, within the parameters of the Licensing Act 2003, it would be extremely difﬁcult to isolate
what is a broad category of premises without including other types of premises that could be eligible
such as working men’s clubs.
The Committee notes that the Elton Report of the Independent Fees Review Panel’s conclusions
found no evidence that any amateur sports clubs had closed because of licensing fees and that it
did not recommend a discount to sports clubs.2 Indeed many sports clubs are still selling alcohol
to make a proﬁt, an activity which, as the Committee recognises, the Government does not want to
subsidise. It is also important to remember that many sports clubs hold functions and events which
have the potential to disturb neighbours, particularly as many clubs are situated in largely residential
areas. In this regard, there is no reason why clubs should not be subject to the same scrutiny by
responsible authorities and interested parties as commercial operations, although the Government
would expect that the outcome of that scrutiny would reﬂect the relative risks of their activities.
In considering this matter, it is important to recognise that the Government cannot introduce crosssubsidy into the Licensing Act fees regime. Therefore, any reduction in fees for one category of
premises cannot be funded by increases for others, unless there is clear evidence that some types of
premises generate different costs in relation to the operation of the licensing regime. In the absence
of any such evidence, any reduction in fees for one category of premises will mean either less
income for local authorities or the need to make up the shortfall from local or national taxpayers. The
Government has been clear that the costs of the licensing regime should fall on those undertaking
licensable activities. The fees regime already includes a multiplier for certain large premises and
we will, when looking at the wider fees issues covered in the report of the Independent Fees Panel,
consider whether there is any evidence to suggest that fees could be further differentiated in this
way. However, it should be noted that the Fees Panel was asked to look at this issue and was unable
to identify any such evidence, beyond extending the multiplier to all large on-licensed premises.
1

http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/la_jpletter.pdf
Report of the Independent Fees Review Panel, Department for Culture, Media and Sport,
http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/feepanelﬁnalreport.pdf
2

2

paragraph 9.12 –

Recommendation 3:
We welcome the increased opportunities for public involvement in decision making and
encourage local authorities and the Government to make every effort to ensure that those
opportunities are taken up. It is important that local authorities make it clear that a comment
on a licensing application can be in its support as well as an objection, and ensure that all
those with an interest in the application, not just local residents, are able to comment on it.
(Paragraph 32)
Evidence shows that the public does indeed feel more involved in decision making. A University
of Westminster Report published in July 2007 noted that: ‘The changes in licensing had had a
generally positive effect on community relations in the areas examined, with residents and local
councillors alike feeling that they had more of a say in the process of granting and challenging
licensing decisions.’3
The Government fully endorses the ability of responsible authorities – such as the police and ﬁre
authorities – and interested parties – residents and businesses in the vicinity of the premises – to
submit positive comments in support of a licence application. The revised guidance issued in 2007
under section 182 of the 2003 Act made it clear that representations can be made in support of,
as well as to object to, applications. This was further ampliﬁed in revisions to the Department’s
guidance to interested parties in December 2007.
The Government feels that the Licensing Act 2003 already provides all those with an interest
with the opportunity to comment on applications. There are strict advertising requirements both
physically on the premises and in the local press and both responsible authorities and interested
parties can make representations against an application. It is also possible for those that feel that
they are not able to object to ask local representatives such as councillors to object on their behalf
to an application if the objections are based on the licensing objectives. In addition, the current
statutory Guidance clariﬁes that local authorities can make councillors aware of applications in their
areas and that it is open to councillors to seek the views of their constituents living in the vicinity
of premises making applications.
Recommendation 4:
We are not convinced by the argument that a lack of evidence that the personal licence system
is being abused is a reason not to create a national database of personal licence holders. Indeed
without one it seems to us unlikely that such evidence could be proffered. We recommend
that the Government should consider how to implement a national database – to allow law
enforcement agencies and licensing authorities to share information more effectively – and to
consider which would be the most appropriate authority to maintain it, as it will be crucial
that any database is kept up-to-date. (Paragraph 36)
The Government maintains the position that it cannot commit taxpayer’s and feepayer’s money to
setting up and maintaining a database without a convincing business case. An assessment of the
case by external consultants in 2005 failed to ﬁnd evidence to support such a database. Since then,
there has been little additional evidence to support the creation of a database and we do not accept
that a database needs to be established to gather such evidence. It should, for example, be possible
to calculate the time that each police force or licensing authority spends cross-checking licensees
with other authorities and base an estimate of costs on these ﬁgures.
We are not, however, ruling out establishing a central register in the future and will continue to
monitor the situation. We will also consider suggestions from local authorities and responsible
authorities on how better to share information.
3
Expecting ‘Great Things’? The Impact of the Licensing Act 2003 on Democratic Involvement, Dispersal and Drinking
Cultures – University of Westminster, July 2007

3

Recommendation 5:
We welcome the Minister’s recognition of the difﬁculties faced by bereaved families in
taking action within the required seven day period following the death of the licensee. We
recommend that in such cases the allowable period should be extended from seven to 21 days.
(Paragraph 38)
The Government is pleased that the Committee supports this action and shares our concern
about the difﬁculties that bereaved families face following the death of a licensee. We have made
a commitment to consider extending the notice period on death, incapacity, insolvency etc. of a
licensee and DCMS plans to consult on the matter later this year. The length of the extended period
will depend upon the outcome of the consultation but we note the Committee’s preference for a 21
day period.
Recommendation 6:
We welcome the Legislative Reform Order, which removes the need for certain volunteerrun premises to designate a speciﬁc premises supervisor, but note that there will still be
considerable costs and administration involved in obtaining a premises licence for village and
community venues. We hope that the Government will consider further ways in which costs
and administration can be reduced for such venues. (Paragraph 40)
The Government is pleased that the Committee welcomes the Legislative Reform Order for
community premises which is now in its ﬁnal stages and we expect to come into force on 29th July
2009. In line with cross-Government efforts to cut red tape, village and community premises will
beneﬁt from several initiatives in DCMS’s Simpliﬁcation Plan 20084 such as making electronic
forms a reality, reducing the length and simplifying application forms and making advertising
requirements more effective.
The Government is always open to looking at ways to reduce costs and administration as long as the
same level of scrutiny and necessary public protection is maintained. We will observe how village
and community premises use the alternative process for supervision of alcohol sales and continue
to monitor the situation.
Recommendation 7:
We agree that the public should always be involved in decision making and endorse the
amendments proposed to the Legislative Reform Order by the Government. (Paragraph 44)
We welcome the Committee’s support for the minor variations process and the proposed amendments.
The Government laid an amended Order incorporating the suggested changes in Parliament on
26th March 2009 and we are now in the ﬁnal stages of the legislative process and expect it to
come into force on 29th July 2009. We estimate that the new process could save licence and club
certiﬁcate holders around £1.9 – £2.3 million per year. This will beneﬁt a wide range of large and
small businesses including pubs, working men’s and political clubs and village and community
halls. This measure will not result in any increased costs on businesses or organisations.
Recommendation 8:
We believe that the Government should act to remove this confusion and make it clear
that changes to a licence for live music can be made using the minor variations procedure.
(Paragraph 46)

4

http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/Simpliﬁcation_Plan_2008.pdf

4

The Government accepts the Committee’s desire for clarity, but we do not believe that there is
confusion in the Order. It is the Government’s intention that live music should beneﬁt from the
Minor Variations process as long as it has no adverse impact on the licensing objectives and we
are working with the Local Government Association (LGA), LACORS and the Musicians Union
to achieve this. However, we recognise that this may not always be the case and some live music
events may have the potential to have an adverse impact on the licensing objectives. We believe the
Guidance will address the Committee’s concerns.
Recommendation 9:
We welcome any attempt to simplify the process of making a minor variation to a licence
and reduce unnecessary costs. However, we are concerned at the apparent contradictions
contained within the Explanatory Note, and the wording of the Order itself, which we believe
will severely restrict the ability of licensees to take advantage of this procedure for all but the
most minimal of variations. The Government must ensure that the discretion it is granting to
licensing authorities is a real discretion, and not a power that, in practice, they are unable to
use. (Paragraph 47)
The Government welcomes the Committee’s support for the Minor Variations process. However,
we do not believe there is any conﬂict between the explanatory note and the Order itself. As noted
above, the Government is working with key stakeholders to increase understanding and uptake of
existing exemptions in the Licensing Act 2003 and to encourage the use of the Minor Variations
process to add live music as licensed entertainment in those premises already licensed for the sale
of alcohol.
Recommendation 10:
Nevertheless we recommend that, in addition to the police, councillors, as elected representatives
of the public, should be able to object to a TEN, and that the period for such objections should
be three working days to allow both the police and councillors time to consider adequately
whether they wish to object. (Paragraph 51)
The Government has no plans to allow councillors to object to temporary event notices. Allowing
local councillors to object to temporary event notices would inadvertently affect a huge range of
events such as community events, village fetes and charity fundraising events. Temporary event
notices are largely used by community groups. The National Confederation of Parent Teacher
Associations suggests that up to half the temporary event notices could be given by Parent Teacher
Associations. We would not want to increase the bureaucratic burden on these groups.
The aim behind the temporary event system is for a light touch process which is controlled within
tight parameters and restrictions. Such a change would signiﬁcantly increase the burden on licensing
authorities and applicants. If there are grave concerns about a temporary event then the police would
have reasonable authority to intervene and we believe this is sufﬁcient. From time to time issues are
brought to the attention of Ministers concerning the operation of temporary event notices. In almost
all instances, there are other means of controlling the problem identiﬁed. However, as part of our
continuing examination of the temporary event system, we will continue to consider whether any
changes are necessary.
Concerning the period for objections, we are considering this as a part of the commitments made
in the Department’s Simpliﬁcation Plan 20085 and intend to consider a longer period for police to
object. The length of the extended period will be subject to further consideration but we note the
Committee’s preference for a period of three working days.

5

http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/Simpliﬁcation_Plan_2008.pdf

5

Recommendation 11:
We believe that the time is right for a modest increase in the number of TENs which can be
applied for and a relaxation of the number which can be applied for per person. We are satisﬁed
that, when taken in conjunction with our recommendations above concerning improving the
objection process, an increase in the number of TENs per year and the number which an
individual can apply for to 15 provides a reasonable balance between meeting the needs of
those who use TENs and protecting the public. (Paragraph 55)
As the Committee notes, there are conﬂicting views with calls for both a reduction in the number of
temporary event notices a premises can apply for and for an increase. Should there be compelling
evidence that there should be either an increase or a decrease, then there are powers in the Licensing
Act 2003 to effect appropriate changes.
We have considered increasing the number of notices per year to 15 following the Independent Fees
Review Panel’s recommendations. However we believe that the current limits are a good balance
between maintaining necessary public protection and keeping the temporary event notice system as
a light touch regime. We will nevertheless keep this under review.
We are not convinced that it is appropriate to relax the number of temporary event notices that
can be given by each individual from 5 to 15. We are not satisﬁed that a person without accredited
training should be responsible for alcohol sales more than once a month. In circumstances where an
individual will need to do this, they can apply for a personal licence and be able to give 50 notices
per year. This would require them to undergo training from an accredited organisation and therefore
provide greater public protection.
It would also be inappropriate for the Government to consider this recommendation in isolation.
The Committee states that this recommendation reﬂects a balance with recommendation 10, which
would alter the objection process to temporary event notices. As the Government is not minded to
commit to allowing more people to object to temporary event notices, accepting a relaxation in the
number of temporary event notices that can be given on its own would not reﬂect the balance that
the Committee refers to.
We will consider minor changes on timings, but would be reluctant to make changes to a system that
is currently working well.
Recommendation 12:
We recommend that the Government should consider implementing a reduction in the cost of
applying for a TEN in order to lessen the burden on voluntary, community and not-for-proﬁt
groups. (Paragraph 56)
The Government is committed to keeping the cost on all businesses and organisations – not-forproﬁt, for proﬁt and otherwise – to a minimum, particularly during an economic downturn.
As the Committee noted in a previous recommendation (6), the Government is in the process of
passing legislation to help community and voluntary groups. Many community premises do not
currently have a licence to supply alcohol, often because the burdens and responsibilities are too
great for premises run largely by volunteers. Many therefore currently rely on temporary event
notices. The Legislative Reform Order for community premises is now in its ﬁnal stages and we
expect it to come into force on 29th July 2009. This will reduce the burden for committees running
community premises, encouraging more to apply for a licence to supply alcohol. We estimate that
the overall potential savings under this proposal could be around £200,000 per year. It is not a huge
sum of money, but it is the removal of red tape that will make a difference to volunteers on hard
working village hall committees. It will also make it easier for such groups to obtain a premises
licence to supply alcohol, removing the need for them to rely on temporary event notices. The
Government believes that this is a more effective method.

6

Fees are set to reﬂect the cost of the process. Reducing the cost of giving a temporary event notice
would therefore increase the costs to local authorities and it would then ultimately fall to the taxpayer
to fund the shortfall. It is also not immediately obvious that voluntary groups pose signiﬁcantly less
work. Rather than reduce the resources available to licensing authorities to discharge their functions
under the Act, the Government believes it is better to look at removing unnecessary administrative
burdens and costs from the application process. That is why we are planning to introduce electronic
forms which will potentially save organisations giving temporary event notices a considerable
amount of cost and effort.
Recommendation 13:
Our assessment is that the major impetus for changes seen in licensed venues appears to
have come from consumer choice and market forces. However without the alterations to the
licensing regime introduced by the Licensing Act such changes might not have been possible.
(Paragraph 59)
We welcome the Committee’s support for the Licensing Act which has brought about considerable
cost and efﬁciency savings and continues to support and nurture a vibrant and diverse industry.
Recommendation 14:
We recommend that density of venues in a particular area should always be a consideration
taken into account by a licensing authority when considering an application for a premises
licence, in order to ensure that the police and other authorities are able to adequately ensure
the maintenance of public order, and that the Section 182 guidance should be altered to reﬂect
this. (Paragraph 65)
High density of premises in an area is already being tackled by cumulative impact areas. A cumulative
impact area is an area that a local authority has identiﬁed in its statement of licensing policy (section
5 of the Licensing Act 2003) where there is a saturation of licensed premises and the cumulative
impact of any additional premises could affect the licensing objectives. Prior to November 2005,
such areas did not exist.
On 31 March 2008, there were over 110 cumulative impact areas of which 22 per cent were in
Greater London and 19 per cent were in other metropolitan districts in England and Wales. 73
licensing authorities had at least one cumulative impact area, including 22 areas which had two or
more.
At present, cumulative impact areas are not creatures of statute but appear in the statutory Guidance
made under section 182 of the 2003 Act. They have existed since January 2005 and have been
endorsed by the courts. In practice, declaration of a cumulative impact area in a licensing policy
statement (which is generally done on the basis of local crime statistics) means that while each new
application for a premises licence must be considered individually, the licensing authority is entitled
to proceed from a presumption that new applications would be refused unless the applicant can show
that their premises would not add to the crime and disorder experienced in the area. Effectively, the
burden of proof is to an extent reversed.
Licensing is a devolved system and the intention is that decisions should be made by locally elected
people following representations made by responsible authorities such as the police and interested
parties. Currently, when making their tri-annual licensing policy statements, licensing authorities
are required to consider whether to identify cumulative impact areas. Section 5 (3) of The Licensing
Act 2003 dictates that they must consult several authorities, including the police when deciding
whether to identify a cumulative impact area. The Government does not want to undermine local
democracy through national blanket measures that override effective locally initiated measures. We
do however undertake to encourage (through partners such as the LGA and LACORS) licensing

7

authorities to undertake proper consultation with the police on this issue when drafting licensing
policy statements.
Furthermore, the Policing and Crime Bill currently before Parliament contains a mechanism that
(if implemented) enables licensing authorities to tackle several problem premises in an area. This
could be a more targeted and proportionate approach than considering density for all applications
all cases.
Recommendation 15:
The development of partnership working is extremely important part of ensuring that the
licensing objectives contained in the Licensing Act are achieved. We welcome the efforts made
by all involved to develop and maintain successful partnerships and recommend that the
Government should continue to promote partnership working as the most effective method to
deal with licensing related issues. (Paragraph 74)
The Government welcomes the Committee’s recognition of the successful partnership working that
has taken place through such schemes as Business Improvement Districts, voluntary town centre
management initiatives and the Best Bar None awards scheme. The Home Ofﬁce has also recently
provided £3m to 190 local areas to fund alcohol related partnership activity campaigns.
The Government will continue to promote partnership working. For example: working with the
Musicians Union, the Metropolitan Police Service and LACORS on issues over form 696; involving
industry in the drafting of the Guidance sections of the proposed mandatory code of practice for
alcohol sales should this be implemented; the Purple Flag initiative supporting good town centre
management at night; and the Beacon Awards system promoting the night time economy.
Recommendation 16:
We agree that it is not appropriate for issues which should properly be regulated by
other legislation to be included as licensing conditions on retailers’ premises licences.
To devastate a shopkeeper’s livelihood by revoking their licence to sell alcohol due to the
presence of an out of date food item in their store is in our view completely disproportionate.
We recommend that the Section 182 guidance should be amended to make this clear.
(Paragraph 79)
This point is already made very strongly and reiterated several times in the statutory Guidance under
Section 182 of the Licensing Act 2003. The Government is opposed to the general use of blanket
conditions and the Licensing Act 2003 is designed to tailor conditions to individual premises. The
Government will be mindful of this in developing proposals for the proposed mandatory code of
practice for the responsible retail of alcohol.
Following a recent court case, LACORS have publicised and emphasised that licence conditions
must not duplicate other legislation. We will continue to emphasise and promote this.
Recommendation 17:
We accept that the vast majority of people who take advantage of drinks promotions such as
happy hours and supermarket price deals drink responsibly. The banning of all such promotions
seems to us to be disproportionate. Nevertheless if the evidence we have received is true there
is clearly a problem which needs to be addressed. It seems absurd that competition law can
actually prevent a trade association from attempting to do so through giving its licensees
guidelines as to the kind of responsible promotions that should be encouraged. We recommend

8

that the Government should address this problem, if necessary through legislation, as soon as
possible. (Paragraph 83)
The Government does not believe that the Committee’s recommendation is an appropriate method
of tackling this problem.
Competition law does not prevent Trade Associations from issuing guidance to their members; instead
competition law prevents agreements between ﬁrms which lead to a restriction on competition,
where those are not outweighed by beneﬁts to consumers. The Ofﬁce of Fair Trading has produced
guidance on this.
As the report recognises, the majority of promotions are enjoyed responsibly. However, there is
also clearly a problem that needs to be addressed. The Government is committed to addressing this
problem without penalising the majority of people who drink responsibly. The Government has
stated its intent to tackle the most irresponsible promotions and practices through powers proposed
in the Policing and Crime Bill currently before Parliament.
This proposes a mandatory code of practice which is currently being consulted on. The code is
currently divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part includes a small number of mandatory conditions
that would ban the most irresponsible promotions and practices such as ‘All you can drink for
£10’. The second contains a larger number of locally applied conditions that licensing authorities
can apply to two or more problem premises in an area when there is alcohol related nuisance and
disorder related to the premises. This could allow local authorities to tackle promotions such as
happy hours and supermarket price deals exclusively where these promotions are contributing to
alcohol related nuisance and disorder. The third part of the code contains a suite of guidance to help
promote good practice amongst premises.
Recommendation 18:
We recommend that the Government should exempt venues with a capacity of 200 persons
or fewer from the need to obtain a licence for the performance of live music. We further
recommend the reintroduction of the “two-in-a-bar” exemption enabling venues of any size
to put on a performance of non-ampliﬁed music by one or two musicians without the need
for a licence. We believe that these two exemptions would encourage the performance of live
music without impacting negatively on any of the four licensing objectives under the Act.
(Paragraph 92)
There is no direct link between size of audience or number of performers and potential for noise
nuisance or disorder.
DCMS has considered exemptions for small venues, but has not been able to reach agreement on
exemptions that will deliver an increase in live music whilst still retaining essential protections for
local residents.
However, the new Minor Variations process should allow venues to add live music to their licences
quickly and cheaply, as long as the music will not affect the licensing objectives
The Musicians Union and LACORS are jointly chairing a new live music group tasked with
explaining the beneﬁts of Minor Variations for live music to licensees and local authorities and
encouraging take up of the existing exemption for ‘incidental’ live music. This new group will also
tackle any other issues arising from the Act that affect live music.
DCMS has agreed with the Musicians Union and local authority representatives to give the new Minor
Variations process at least a year to bed down before returning to the question of exemptions.

9

Recommendation 19:
Licensing authorities should resist pressure from “interested parties” to impose unreasonable
conditions on events. We believe that Form 696 is indeed unreasonable. Such a form goes well
beyond the requirements of the Licensing Act, and has a detrimental effect on the performance
of live music. We recommend that Form 696 should be scrapped. (Paragraph 97)

10

This is not a recommendation speciﬁcally for Government as form 696 is a Metropolitan Police
Service initiative. We understand that the Metropolitan Police Service currently has no plans to
discontinue use of the form which it regards as an important tool to reduce the risk of harm and to
contain potential crime and disorder arising from a small number of live music events.
Nevertheless, following concerns expressed by industry, musicians and DCMS, the Metropolitan
Police Service has set up a new working group to review the format of Form 696 and to improve
targeting. Members of the group include live music providers, DCMS and LACORS. The Group has
met once and will meet again shortly to consider a revised version of the form.
Recommendation 20:
We recommend that the Statutory Guidance to the Act should be reviewed and reworded to
remove the overt linkage of live music with public disorder. (Paragraph 99)
The Government agrees that there should not be any overt linkage of live music with public disorder,
but does not believe that there such a linkage in the Statutory Guidance.
Paragraph 13.70 of the Statutory Guidance urges licensing authorities to take account in statements of
licensing policy, as part of implementing local authority cultural strategies, of the need ‘to encourage
and promote a broad range of entertainment, particularly live music, dancing and theatre, including
the performance of a wide range of traditional and historical plays, for the wider cultural beneﬁt of
communities’. There is then a general statement that ‘A natural concern to prevent disturbance in
neighbourhoods should always be carefully balanced with these wider cultural beneﬁts, particularly
those for children’.
The Government does not agree this is an ‘overt linkage’ between live music and public disorder. It
is merely a recognition that cultural activities, including live music, may disturb local residents etc.
in some circumstances.
Recommendation 21:
We recommend that the Government should consult on amending the Statutory Guidance to
provide an exemption from the licensing regime for low risk activities which add to communities’
cultural life. (Paragraph 104)
Whilst the Government accepts the sentiment of this recommendation, it cannot use Statutory
Guidance to provide for exemptions.
DCMS is however planning to consider possible exemptions in the future, but other priorities are
currently taking precedent. Whilst we do not envisage that the speciﬁc activities in the Committee’s
report will be speciﬁcally targeted, we will continue to consider the evidence for other ideas. This is
largely because in order for anything to be exempted, it must be properly deﬁned.
Recommendation 22:
We recommend that the Government should consult on the possibility of amending Statutory
Guidance to exempt some forms of low-risk, small-scale travelling entertainment such as
Punch and Judy shows from the requirement to obtain a licence. Where a licence is required
we recommend that a portable licence, of the type issued to cruise ships, should be issued by
the home authority where the operator is based. In setting the fee level for a portable licence
the Government should have regard to the fact that operators have already incurred signiﬁcant
costs in applying for premises licences under the current regime. (Paragraph 114)

11

The Government shares some of the Committee’s concerns about the disproportionate burdens felt
by those who provide entertainment in numerous locations, including travelling circuses.
We recognise that there are certain low-risk, small-scale travelling entertainment shows. However,
when considering exemptions, we have found that it is hard to deﬁne which types of entertainment
should/should not be exempt whilst maintaining the balance between light touch bureaucracy and
public protection. Entertainment such as Punch and Judy shows, for example, often takes place
on local authority land, and the local authority needs to take public protection into account. It is
however worth noting that if a show is being put on as a busking show, they are not necessarily
classiﬁed as ‘entertainment’ and would therefore not need a licence.
Travelling entertainment should beneﬁt from some of the proposals in DCMS’ Simpliﬁcation Plan
20086 such as plans to allow full electronic applications. In addition, it might be possible to include
some forms of travelling entertainment under low impact exemptions,which DCMS will consider in
the future. However, larger forms of entertainment such as circuses do need to be considered against
the licensing objectives and the circus industry itself accepts the need for some kind of licensing
requirement. Ministers have therefore committed to looking at proposals for some kind of portable
licence for such activities and are currently considering options on how best to achieve this.
Recommendation 23:
We believe that it would be unfortunate if changes in licensing of lap dancing establishments
gave the public the impression that such venues offer sex for sale. Such illegal activities
are unacceptable and clubs that condone them should feel the full force of the law.
(Paragraph 122)
The Government fully agrees with the Committee that any licence holders found to be encouraging
or permitting the selling of sex on their premises should face prosecution. Existing laws relating to
brothels allow the police to take action against those who keep, manage or assist in the management
of brothels as well as criminalising those who permit their premises to be used for such purposes.
Reclassifying lap dancing clubs as ‘sex encounter venues’under the Local Government (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1982 will allow local authorities to impose a wider range of conditions on licences
and will therefore provide further assurance that such venues do not offer such services.
However, we do not believe that reclassifying lap dancing clubs as ‘sex encounter venues’ will give
the impression that they offer sex for sale. Instead we believe that the term accurately reﬂects the
nature of the entertainment provided by such venues.
The deﬁnition of ‘relevant entertainment’ introduced by Clause 26 of the Policing and Crime Bill,
clearly states that to qualify as a sex encounter venue the entertainment provided must be a live
performance or display of nudity which is of such a nature that it can “reasonably be assumed to be
provided solely or principally for the purpose of sexually stimulating any member of the audience”.
This deﬁnition does not suggest that these are premises where sex is being sold. Furthermore, the
term ‘sex encounter’ has been used to classify venues such as “peep shows” in London since 1986
and again these are not venues where sex is for sale.
Recommendation 24:
We therefore recommend that the Government should bring forward amendments to the
Policing and Crime Bill to establish a new class of venue under Schedule 3 of the Local
Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act. Legislation should make it mandatory for councils
to license such establishments under this statutory regime, and not under the Licensing Act.
(Paragraph 123)

6

http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/Simpliﬁcation_Plan_2008.pdf

12

The Committee is right to point out that due to the sale of alcohol and the provision of music,
lap dancing clubs pose similar licensing issues to other venues that form part of the night-time
economy, such as pubs and nightclubs. However, the provision of adult entertainment to sexually
stimulate the audience clearly distinguishes them from such venues and gives rise to issues that are
particular to this form of entertainment.
The Policing and Crime Bill seeks to address this issue by introducing a new category of sex
establishment, called a ‘sex encounter venue’, under Schedule 3 of the Local Government
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982. This new category will cover lap dancing clubs and similar
venues that provide live performances or live displays of nudity which “must reasonably be assumed
to be provided solely or principally for the purposes of sexual stimulating a member of the audience”.
The provision of such “relevant entertainment” will be regulated by the 1982 Act, allowing local
people a greater say, while the provision of alcohol and ‘regulated entertainment’ will continue to
be authorised under the Licensing Act 2003.
The Government does not agree with the Committee that these reforms should be mandatory for
local authorities. Many local authorities do not have lap dancing clubs in their area. While we cannot
be exact regarding the numbers, we estimate that under half of all local authorities are responsible
for regulating lap dancing clubs or similar venues. Therefore, the Government does not believe it
is right to impose this legislation irrespective of need. Rather, we believe the correct approach is to
give local authorities the ﬂexibility to decide whether these provisions are necessary based on local
circumstances and with regard to the views of local people.
Recommendation 25:
We recommend that licences for such venues should be granted for a period of ﬁve years,
with the safeguard that any interested party or relevant authority should be able to request a
review of a licence at any time. (Paragraph 124)
The Government does not agree that lap dancing clubs should be granted licences for a period
of ﬁve years. Under reforms introduced by the Policing and Crime Bill lap dancing clubs will be
required to renew their licence at least annually. The Government believes that this is important to
ensure that local communities have the opportunity to comment on the continued operation of such
venues in their area.
Reclassifying lap dancing clubs as sex establishments recognises that they offer entertainment
which is fundamentally different from other entertainment venues, such as nightclubs and pubs,
and that they often raise particular concerns for local communities. For this reason, we believe the
ongoing scrutiny provided by the annual renewal process is justiﬁed. The renewal process provides
local people with the opportunity to make further objections, thereby empowering local people and
ensuring that the local authorities can be responsive to their views.
Recommendation 26:
We welcome this assurance, and suggest that existing lap dancing establishments in possession
of valid premises’ licences should be given a reasonable transition period in which to complete
the switch over to the new regime, and that fees for doing so should be limited to cost recovery.
(Paragraph 125)
The Government agrees with the Committee that the transitional period for existing venues should
be reasonable. The length of the transitional period will be set out in regulations following further
engagement with industry, local authorities and other stakeholders.
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Ofﬁce Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce
ID6205553 08/09 433147 19585
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled ﬁbre content minimum.

1VCMJTIFECZ540 5IF4UBUJPOFSZ0GGJDF BOEBWBJMBCMFGSPN
0OMJOF
XXXUTPTIPQDPVL
.BJM 5FMFQIPOF 'BY&NBJM
540
10#PY /PSXJDI /3(/
5FMFQIPOFPSEFST(FOFSBMFORVJSJFT
'BYPSEFST
&NBJMDVTUPNFSTFSWJDFT!UTPDPVL
5FYUQIPOF
5IF1BSMJBNFOUBSZ#PPLTIPQ
#SJEHF4USFFU 1BSMJBNFOU4RVBSF
-POEPO48"+9
5FMFQIPOFPSEFST(FOFSBMFORVJSJFT
'BYPSEFST
&NBJMCPPLTIPQ!QBSMJBNFOUVL
*OUFSOFUIUUQXXXCPPLTIPQQBSMJBNFOUVL
540!#MBDLXFMMBOEPUIFS"DDSFEJUFE"HFOUT
$VTUPNFSTDBOBMTPPSEFSQVCMJDBUJPOTGSPN
540*SFMBOE
"SUIVS4USFFU #FMGBTU#5(%
5FM 'BY

