Government Response
to House of Commons
Select Committee on
Culture, Media and Sport
5th Report of Session 2008-09:
BBC Commercial Operations

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
June 2009

Cm 7634

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2009
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or agency
logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing it is reproduced
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown
copyright and the title of the document speciﬁed.
Where we have identiﬁed any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please write to Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information,
Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or
e-mail: licensing@opsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101763424

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO HOUSE OF
COMMONS SELECT COMMITTEE ON CULTURE,
MEDIA AND SPORT 5th REPORT OF SESSION
2008-09: BBC COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS
Introduction
The Government welcomes the Select Committee’s Fifth Report of the 2008-09 session and is
grateful to the Committee for its consideration of these issues. The Government considered very
carefully the evidence presented to the Committee and notes the conclusions and recommendations
set out in the report.
The Government remains ﬁrmly of the view that the BBC should be encouraged to generate
income through commercial activity, including the sale of programme rights. The transparency
of the BBC’s commercial activities is, however, vital and for that reason the 2006 Charter and
Agreement introduced safeguards to ensure that the terms of transactions between public services
and commercial activities remain clear at all times.
The Government said in the Digital Britain Interim Report that it would discuss the future activities
of BBC Worldwide with the BBC Trust and we will return to this issue in the ﬁnal Digital Britain
Report, to be published shortly.
Response to conclusions and recommendations
The Government notes that the majority of the recommendations are for the BBC Trust and BBC
Executive to respond to rather than Government but makes the following responses.
Recommendation / conclusion 1: We recognise that signiﬁcant beneﬁts are realised from the
BBC undertaking commercial activities. Clearly, the proﬁts generated by the exploitation of
its intellectual property allows the BBC to invest more in its public service remit than would
otherwise be the case. We also note the positive sentiments expressed by signiﬁcant sections of
the creative economy in relation to the business practices of BBC Worldwide, although we are
conscious that the industry is unlikely to bite the hand that feeds it. The principle that the BBC
should be able to maximise the value of its brand by exploiting its intellectual property, subject
to appropriate safeguards, in order to relieve pressure on the licence fee is clearly sensible. We
share the view of the public and the Government in this respect. In the chapters which follow
in this report, however, it is the manner in which some of the BBC’s commercial revenue is
generated, and the governance arrangements within which Worldwide operates, which give
rise to legitimate concern. (Paragraph 16)
The Government notes the Committee’s view.
Recommendation / conclusion 16. We recognise the ﬁnancial pressure Channel 4 is experiencing
and we restate our view that it is essential to retain plurality in the provision of UK-produced
public service content. We appreciate that a partnership between Channel 4 and BBC
Worldwide could deliver ﬁnancial beneﬁts that may go some way towards closing Channel
4’s funding gap. However, we are sceptical as to whether a wide-ranging partnership or even
merger with BBC Worldwide would be the best solution for Channel 4, for the licence fee
payer, or for the media industry as a whole. While we do see some value in the direct transfer
of assets—particularly Worldwide’s UKTV channels—to Channel 4, we believe that a broader
and more complex arrangement would have a number of drawbacks. The extra businesses
in which Worldwide would have a stake in would be likely to make Worldwide an even more
aggressively commercial organisation. Furthermore, we see no obvious synergy between
Channel 4, which produces no content of its own, and Worldwide, which is primarily a content
distributor. It is also apparent that any partnership, however great the scope, would still only
account for a proportion of Channel 4’s £150 million annual funding gap. (Paragraph 103)

1

As indicated in the Digital Britain interim report, the Government recognises the pressures on
Channel 4’s business model and the importance of maintaining plurality of provision of public
service content. We have been considering a range of structural options for the creation of the
sustainable second public service organisation, drawing on Channel 4’s assets, that we outlined
in the interim report. We shall announce our conclusions in the ﬁnal Digital Britain report, to be
published shortly.
The Government notes the Committee’s concerns about the possible effects of any wide-ranging
partnership or merger between Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide. In considering the options, we
have taken into account the implications not only for Channel 4 itself but also for audiences and for
industry. The scope for synergies to create extra value for reinvestment in public content has been
central to our considerations. As regards the Channel 4 ‘funding gap’ referred to by the Committee,
the Government believes that any such ﬁgures will need to be assessed in the light of Chanel 4’s
future role and remit, and in the broader public service context.
Recommendation / conclusion 17. While a partnership between Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide
would be likely to increase funding for Channel 4, at the same time it would also reduce the
revenue returned to the BBC by Worldwide, thereby putting more pressure on the licence
fee. We believe it would be far cleaner and simpler to effect this funding change directly. We
therefore reiterate our previous recommendation that, instead of the proposed partnership, a
proportion of the licence fee should be made available to Channel 4, in order for it to sustain
its public service programming. (Paragraph 104)
The Government notes the Committee’s view that a proportion of the licence fee revenue should be
made available to Channel 4, in preference to any indirect transfer of value by means of a partnership
between Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide. As indicated above, one of the key questions we have been
considering in relation to Channel 4 is the scope for synergies that can create additional value, rather
than simply re-distributing existing resources.
Recommendation / conclusion 18. We believe that the issues we have identiﬁed in relation to
Worldwide’s activities and governance will still need to be addressed even if a partnership with
Channel 4 is established. Whatever the decision on any proposed partnership, we believe that
the rest of our recommendations in this report continue to stand. (Paragraph 105)
The Government notes the Committee’s view.
Recommendation / conclusion 20: There are major beneﬁts from the BBC undertaking
commercial activities. Most importantly, the proﬁts generated by the exploitation of the
BBC’s intellectual property can be reinvested in the BBC’s public services, to the beneﬁt of
licence fee payers. We fully support this principle. However, the manner in which some of the
BBC’s commercial revenue is generated, and the governance arrangements within which the
BBC’s commercial arm—BBC Worldwide—operates, cause us and others increasing concern.
Worldwide has proved successful in recent years in exploiting new commercial opportunities.
Its expansion was largely made possible by a loosening of the rules that govern the limits to
its operations. However, there is clearly a balance to be drawn, between Worldwide generating
a return for the BBC, and limiting Worldwide’s operations in order to ensure it upholds the
BBC’s reputation and does not damage its commercial competitors. (Paragraph 112)
The Government notes the Committee’s views and agrees that it is important to ensure that BBC
Worldwide’s activities do not jeopardise the value of the BBC brand or distort the market. These are
two of the criteria set out in the Charter and Agreement.
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Ofﬁce Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce
ID6163553 6/09 429379 19585
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled ﬁbre content minimum.

2

1VCMJTIFECZ540 5IF4UBUJPOFSZ0GGJDF BOEBWBJMBCMFGSPN
0OMJOF
XXXUTPTIPQDPVL
.BJM 5FMFQIPOF 'BY&NBJM
540
10#PY /PSXJDI /3(/
5FMFQIPOFPSEFST(FOFSBMFORVJSJFT
'BYPSEFST
&NBJMDVTUPNFSTFSWJDFT!UTPDPVL
5FYUQIPOF
5IF1BSMJBNFOUBSZ#PPLTIPQ
#SJEHF4USFFU 1BSMJBNFOU4RVBSF
-POEPO48"+9
5FMFQIPOFPSEFST(FOFSBMFORVJSJFT
'BYPSEFST
&NBJMCPPLTIPQ!QBSMJBNFOUVL
*OUFSOFUIUUQXXXCPPLTIPQQBSMJBNFOUVL
540!#MBDLXFMMBOEPUIFS"DDSFEJUFE"HFOUT
$VTUPNFSTDBOBMTPPSEFSQVCMJDBUJPOTGSPN
540*SFMBOE
"SUIVS4USFFU #FMGBTU#5(%
5FM 'BY

