DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO
THE HOUSE OF LORDS SELECT
COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS
REPORT ON THE BRITISH FILM AND
TELEVISION INDUSTRIES – DECLINE
OR OPPORTUNITY?

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
March 2010

Cm 7841

£5.50

DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO
THE HOUSE OF LORDS SELECT
COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS
REPORT ON THE BRITISH FILM AND
TELEVISION INDUSTRIES – DECLINE
OR OPPORTUNITY?

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
March 2010

Cm 7841

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2010
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or agency logos) may be reproduced free
of charge in any format or medium providing it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The
material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission from the copyright
holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please contact the Office of Public Sector Information, Information Policy Team, Kew,
Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or e-mail: licensing@opsi.gsi.gov.uk.
ISBN: 9780101784122
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2355594

3/10

2325

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE HOUSE
OF LORDS SELECT COMMITTEE ON
COMMUNICATIONS REPORT ON THE BRITISH
FILM AND TELEVISION INDUSTRIES – DECLINE
OR OPPORTUNITY?
Introduction
The Government welcomes the Select Committee’s First Report of the 2009-10 session.
The Government is grateful to the Committee for its examination of the key issues relating to
the film and television industries in the United Kingdom, based on written and oral evidence
from stakeholders. We welcome the detailed consideration the Committee has given to these
issues, and note its recommendations.
The Government welcomes the Committee’s support on provisions contained within in the
Digital Economy Bill to support Independently Funded News Consortia in providing local
and regional news services. We also welcome the Committee’s support for the provision that
brings film production within the public service remit of Channel 4, and for the approach the
Government has taken in tackling unlawful file sharing.
The Government has carefully considered all the recommendations suggested by the Committee
and is pleased to be able to present its response.

Conclusions and Recommendations
●● (1) We recommend that, given current financial circumstances and the value to
the international film industry of a stable tax regime, the Government should
keep the rate of the tax credit for big budget films at its current level. At the
same time, we recommend that the rate of the tax credit be kept under review
by the Government, in consultation with the industry, in order to ensure that
the UK does not become uncompetitive as a venue for international filmmaking.
(para 73)
●● (2) Given the problems faced by independent film makers in raising finance
for their projects, particularly in the current recession, we recommend that the
Government should consider raising the net rate of film tax relief for productions
under £5m to 30 per cent. (para 78)
●● (3) We acknowledge that there would be a benefit to producers from a change
to the “used or consumed” provisions, to extend the tax credit to production
expenditure overseas, and the low cost of this change. We recommend that the
salaries of personnel employed on a film should be considered eligible costs
whether they are working in the UK or on location overseas so long as the
personnel are paid and taxed in the UK. (para 83)

1

1.

We welcome the committee’s acknowledgement that the Film Tax Relief is essential to
ensuring that the UK remains an attractive place for inward investment. Recent production
figures showed that 2009 was a bumper year. The amount of money spent on making films
in the UK in 2009 including Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part I, Robin Hood,
Gulliver’s Travels and Nowhere Boy totalled £956.9 million.

2.

The Total UK gross box office for the year was a record £944 million, up 11% on 2008 and
overall territory gross (including the Republic of Ireland) exceeded £1 billion for the first
time and cinema admissions in 2009 reached 173.5 million. This represents 5.6% growth
year-on-year, from 164.2 million in 2008. This is the highest since 2002 and the second
highest since 1971. Significantly, inward investment from international filmmakers, such
as the major Hollywood studios locating productions in the UK, increased by 52.6%
bringing in £752.7 million into the British economy (£356.8 million in 2008). This is the
highest total ever recorded.

3.

The new Film Tax Relief plays a key role in supporting the UK’s successful film industry.
Since the introduction of the scheme in 2007, over 290 films have received support worth
a total of £205 million, promoting over £2 billion of investment in the UK film industry.
Government is aware of the issues surrounding the “used or consumed” definition of
qualifying spend raised by some sections of the film industry. Government has not seen
sufficient evidence to justify changing a successful and stable scheme. However, the film
tax relief will be kept under review to ensure that it is meeting the policy objective of
promoting the sustainable production of culturally British films.
●● (4) We recognise the claims of the videogames industry for support in the face of
foreign government-subsidised competition, and recommend that the Government
consider providing tax incentives for videogames production. (para 88)

4.

The 2009 Pre-Budget Report announced that, whilst recognising the challenges currently
faced by the sector in competing internationally, the Government is not currently persuaded
that the evidence is sufficiently compelling to justify the introduction of a tax incentive
for the development of culturally British video games at this time. The Government
remains committed to providing a tax system and business environment that is beneficial
to businesses from all sectors, including the video games industry. The Government will
continue to look at ways to make the UK tax system more competitive and, as with all
decisions on tax policy, will keep the situation under review.
●● (5) Given the difficulties of financing independent British films, particularly
following the withdrawal of banks from film financing, we recommend that the
Government should look at ways of facilitating greater British private investment
in film production. This would need to be done in a way that ensured that the private
investment was genuine and not simply a means of tax avoidance. (para 93)

5.

There continues to be a need to encourage private investment in UK independent film, and
the Government recognises that the withdrawal of film financing by banks is beginning
to have an impact. However, we do not think that the situation is as severe as has been
suggested. In 2009 more than £700 million was spent on film in the UK through inward
investment alone. Also, there was nearly £170 million spent on domestic UK production.

6.

Although the share of the UK market taken by British independent films in 2009 seems
relatively low at 8.5%, this is the highest level it has been for ten years and reflects the
success of films such as Slumdog Millionaire and In The Loop.

2

7.

Overall, the production figures are generally good, and considering that the country is
coming out of a recession, the film industry has fared well. While there is an obvious need
to avoid complacency, we are confident that the UK Film Council, the Office of the British
Film Commissioner and film and media companies themselves will continue to work hard
to attract investment to the UK for films of all sizes.
●● (6) We question, however, whether an industry body like the UK Film Council
should be substantially financed by the Lottery rather than direct Government
support. We regret the reduction in funding made because of the demands of the
2012 Olympic Games. We recommend that the funding level should be restored
immediately after 2012/13. (para 103)

8.

The Government firmly believes that the Lottery funding to the UK Film Council enables
it to run film production, distribution and exhibition funds as part of the Lottery good
causes programme. The UK Film Council currently receives circa £25 million in Grantin-Aid funding and £30 million in Lottery funding annually. Removing that funding
would with mean replacing it with £30 million from the Exchequer or discontinuing vital
schemes that very effectively support film in the UK. This Lottery funding was originally
distributed by the Arts Council England for film activities prior to the creation of UK Film
Council in 2000.

9.

The 2012 Olympics is an event of national prestige for the UK; all Lottery distributors are
making an appropriate commitment and it is right that the UK Film Council is included.
The Film Council’s contribution will be around £21 million over four years, with the last
payment in 2013/14. From 2013/14 all Lottery good causes income will revert to the
existing good causes and with Lottery income increasing this will mean more for film.
On current projections, UK Film Council can expect to receive 14% more Lottery funding
in 2014/15 than it did in 2007/08 (the last year before the transfers to the 2012 Olympics
began).
●● (7) We do not consider that the small saving, which a merger of the UK Film
Council and the BFI would be likely to achieve, would by itself justify an
amalgamation. (para 107)
●● (8) If, however, the proposal for the merger of the UK Film Council and the
BFI goes ahead, it will be important that any organisational changes neither
prejudice nor deter private donations to the BFI’s educational and archival
work. (para 108)

10.

The merger of the BFI and the UK Film Council into a new single integrated body for
film will provide a strong, well informed voice that will deliver real and visible results for
the benefit of UK film audiences and for the UK film industry. Created from the existing
expertise, knowledge and assets of the BFI and the UK Film Council, the new body
will place equal emphasis on support and promotion of film culture and support for the
business of film. The merger will also free up resources that can be redirected towards
front-line services to support film. The boards of both the UK Film Council and the BFI
have recently given their support to the creation of this new body.

11.

Plans are now being drawn up for the merger and we will ensure that the legal character
of the new body is compatible with the funding streams both organisations currently
enjoy. Great care will be taken to ensure that the merger process does not hinder any
ongoing work.

3

●● (9) We welcome the UK Film Council’s emphasis in its consultation document on
supporting British films and filmmakers as its first core activity, and its proposal
to use funds recouped from its investment in film to top up the Film Production
Fund’s budget. (para 110)
12.

The Government joins the committee in welcoming the approach taken by the UK Film
Council. We await with interest the outcomes of the consultation but it is clear that in a
more challenging public spending environment prioritising resources is essential and the
focus on British film makers is strongly welcomed by the Government.
●● (10) We support the UK Film Council’s continuing commitment, as part of its first
core activity, to the promotion of the UK as an inward investment destination for
film production. In this context, we strongly support the proposal to strengthen
the Office of the British Film Commissioner. (para 111)

13.

We support this recommendation. We welcome the committee’s acknowledgement of
the importance of inward investment to the UK Film industry and we are happy that
recent production figures have demonstrated significant growth. The UK has a lot to offer
international film makers in terms of the skilled professionals, the strength and depth
of the infrastructure, as well as fiscal incentives. We welcome the UK Film Council’s
more focussed efforts to secure more investment, and targeting the promotion of inward
investment to the UK. We are confident that recent successes will be sustained.
●● (11) We welcome the provisions in the Digital Economy Bill, which would bring
film production within the public service remit of Channel 4. We encourage the
BBC to give greater recognition to the role that BBC Films can play in developing
new projects and new talent in the British independent film sector. (para 117)

14.

The Government is pleased to note the Committee’s support for our proposals, in the
Digital Economy Bill, to extend the Channel 4 Corporation’s (C4C) functions to include
investment in films for cinema release in the United Kingdom. The Bill will also require
C4C to broadcast, or distribute on electronic networks, feature films that reflect cultural
activity in the United Kingdom, including third party films, that is to say films made
by other organisations. These provisions will help to ensure C4C maintain their longstanding and highly successful contribution to UK films and provide a showcase for the
wider UK film industry.

15.

Whilst the BBC’s film strategy is a matter for the BBC, we welcome the contribution BBC
Films has made to independent production in the UK. Award winning films such as The
Duchess illustrate the value of this contribution.
●● (12) We urge the Government, the UK Film Council and the organisations
representing the exhibition sector to find a way of completing the digital
equipping of cinemas in the UK which, as necessary, provides help to smaller
independent cinemas to purchase or lease digital equipment. (para 123)

16.

4

The Government recognises that digital conversion for cinemas is and will be for a long
time a very serious issue for the industry. A great deal has been and is being done in the
UK to support the conversion of independent cinemas, from the UK Film Council’s £12
million Digital Screen Network to the recently established UK Digital Funding Group, set
up by the exhibitors to help with the costs of conversion.

17.

The UK is still in the lead on the roll-out of digital projection technology in Europe with
more than 500 screens now equipped; however the majority of these are in multiplexes
and part of major chains. The costs of conversion (around £55,000) are very prohibitive
to independent and small-chain cinemas and many of these are in rural areas.

18.

This issue does not just affect film – the possibilities presented around alternative content
will mean that increasingly people will go to cinemas to watch sporting and cultural/arts
events. Football, rugby, opera and theatre have all been shown in cinemas recently, to
large crowds.

19.

As mentioned in the Digital Britain White Paper, the Government looks to industry to
take the lead on this and the UK Digital Funding Group is a very welcome step forward.
We also feel there can be benefits to looking to share information and ideas between and
across EU Member States. The Spanish Presidency and the Commission are looking to
produce Council Conclusions regarding digital cinema that are likely to urge Member
States and the EU to work together to find effective solutions.
●● (13) Irrespective of the outcome of the test case on camcording of films in
cinemas, we remain concerned that the law is unclear and provides insufficient
deterrent to abuse. We recommend that the Government reconsider the case for
specific legislation to make it a criminal offence to record a film in a cinema by
camcorder. (para 129)

20.

The Government notes the Committee’s views. However, the Committee will be aware
that in November of last year, on the Isle of Wight, a man was summarily convicted under
section 6 of the Fraud Act 2006 for camcording in a cinema using a mobile phone. This
case suggests that we already have adequate existing legislation.
●● (14) Given the strength of film industry concern about the threat from audiovisual
piracy, as reflected in the evidence we received, the Committee supports the
Government’s decision to introduce regulatory measures to combat unlawful
peer-to-peer file sharing. (para 132)

21.

The Government welcomes the Committee’s recommendation and is seeking to ensure
regulatory measures to help combat unlawful peer-to-peer file sharing are implemented
via the Digital Economy Bill. This needs to go hand-in-hand with industry efforts to
ensure that there are legitimate, attractive and competitive ways for people to access and
enjoy audio-visual and other creative content, and industry working to get the message
across that copyright is worth protecting.
●● (15) We welcome the decision of some companies in the audiovisual industries
to change their business models in order to meet the legitimate demands of
their customers while generating a return on their investment in content, and
encourage other companies to do the same. (para 136)

22.

The Government agrees that as the markets for audiovisual products and services change,
businesses will have to adapt – often rapidly and radically – to ensure that they are able
to survive and flourish. For example cinemas are utilising digital projection technology in
order to provide “alternative content” such as live sport and opera.

5

23.

We also believe it is also vital for businesses and organisations involved in the audiovisual
industries to work towards mutually beneficial practises that provide an accessible and
legal offer to customers.
●● (16) We support the Government’s intention to sell a part of BBC Worldwide,
creating a public private company. We believe that such a company, with a
continuing link to the BBC, would be capable of becoming a major global brand
for distributing UK content, producing additional profits, employment and
opportunities for British production companies. (para 220)

24.

As the report notes, the role of BBC Worldwide was addressed in the Digital Britain
White Paper. Government is encouraging the BBC Trust to consider proposals to achieve
the greater separation outlined in the White Paper, which could include the sale of a part
of BBC Worldwide.
●● (17) We recommend the extension of the film tax credit, on a pilot basis, to
children’s programmes and animation productions made for television. This
pilot, if successful, might be extended to other genres. (para 226)
●● (18) We welcome the provisions in the Digital Economy Bill on support for
independently funded news consortia to provide regional and local services.
(para 229)
●● (19) Given the continuing decline in funding for UK content provision, we
recommend that the Government should consider use of the proceeds of the sale
of spectrum and a part of the BBC licence fee. (para 239)

25.

The Government shares the Committee’s concerns around the declining investment in
non-news content, particularly children’s content. That is why the Digital Economy Bill
will place a new requirement for the Channel 4 Corporation (C4C) to include content for
older children and young adults in its services. We consider that adjusting C4C’s functions
in this way is a more appropriate way of securing increased provision of children’s content
without adding pressure on the public purse during this difficult economic period.

26.

We will make a final decision on the use of the licence fee nearer the time that Independently
Funded News Consortia (IFNCs) are rolled out. This will also be the right time to take
a decision on the funding of non-news, in particular children’s content, as we will be
able to take into account experience from the IFNCs pilot on funding requirements and
workability of contestability, for example, and the state of media markets and potential
funding gaps at that time.

27.

The Government is also working with the content industry to explore other ways to fund
UK content. The Digital Test Bed project, due to go live in Autumn 2010, is expected to
trial new monetisation methods for inline content, such as a single-click micropayment
billing system for on demand video services.
●● (20) Given the current financial constraints on the commercially-funded PSBs,
we do not think it is realistic to introduce quotas on specific genres of television
programming. (para 248)

28.

6

The Government agrees with the Committee’s position on genre specific quotas.

●● (21) We recommend that Ofcom should work more closely with cable and satellite
channels based in the UK, to explore ways of ensuring that the aim of the rule
on European content, as set out in the EU Audiovisual Media Services Directive,
is met. (para 253)
29.

The Government agrees that it is important for Ofcom to work closely with UK-based
cable and satellite channels to ensure that these meet the requirements of the Audiovisual
Media Services Directive (AVMS). So far as Articles 4 and 5 are concerned, however,
we think it is also important to bear in mind that the Directive calls for the requirements
in respect of European and independent content to be met ‘where practicable’ and ‘by
appropriate means’. Ofcom must strike an appropriate balance between its duty towards
consumers and citizens to secure a wide range of television services, provided by a
plurality of broadcasters, and the requirements of Articles 4 and 5 of the AVMS Directive.
The Government believes that the present arrangements achieve that.
●● (22) Although we do not favour the introduction of industry fees in the current
economic climate, we believe that the Government should ask Ofcom to assess
research already done on possible use of fees in the UK, and commission them
to conduct further research to reach firm conclusions on the likely costs and
benefits of such fees. This would provide a firm basis on which Parliament might
make any future decisions. (para 268)

30.

The Government agrees with the Committee that industry fees should not be introduced
in the current economic climate. We have already conducted research on retransmission
fees and copyright levies as part of the Digital Britain Report and A Copyright Strategy
for the Digital Age, but we see the merit of a robust comprehensive assessment of industry
fees on which Parliament could take future decisions. The Government will therefore ask
Ofcom to assess existing research and conduct further research on the likely costs and
benefits of implementing industry fees.
●● (23) We welcome the positive impact that the Terms of Trade have had on the
growth of the independent production sector, and the benefits this has had on the
sector’s contribution to UK content. We support the Government’s proposal to
review the Terms of Trade, in the light of changes in the independent production
sector and the impact they can have on the commercial PSBs. (para 273)

31.

The framework set up to support the independent production sector is one of the
biggest successes of the Communications Act 2003. It has led to the creation of an
independent production sector generating revenue of £2.2bn in 2008, mainly from primary
television rights.

32.

The Government announced in the Interim Digital Britain Report that we would review the
existing Terms of Trade in light of new entrants to the market, new business models and
new distribution channels. Since then, we published Digital Britain: Assessing the policy
framework for Public Service Rights, and held several workshops for both independent
producers and commissioners to discuss the Terms of Trade. We published our conclusions
arising from this review in the Digital Britain Final Report. We found that the statutory
framework for the Terms of Trade is continuing to work well.
●● (24) There is a serious risk that the UK will lose out by the decision to block
Project Kangaroo and we strongly regret the Government’s failure to intervene
in the Competition Commission’s investigation. We urge that, if other similar

7

UK-based video on demand projects are proposed, the Government will ensure
that the implications for the British television industry are properly taken into
account. (para 280)
33.

The Government notes the Committee’s comments. Mergers are regulated to ensure that
the benefits of effective competition are not lost when previously distinct enterprises
operating in the same market come under common control. The Secretary of State does
have a reserve power to intervene in mergers but only in cases where he considers that a
merger may have a detrimental effect in relation to a specified public interest consideration
(such as ensuring a wide range of broadcasting of high quality and wide appeal) that
would not be otherwise be considered. This was not the case in relation to Kangaroo.
●● (25) We recommend that the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills
should encourage the Higher Education Funding Council to deploy some of its
funding to support high-level, post-graduate training in the post-production
and animation sectors. (para 295)

34.

The Government is aware that Skillset, representing employers, is engaged with the Higher
Education (HE) sector on skills issues. The forthcoming report by the UK Commission
on Employment and Skills (UKCES), to which Skillset and other Sector Skills Councils
(SSCs) have contributed, is aimed at ensuring providers, educators, and the Higher
Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), are fully aware of the skills required
across all UK sectors, highlighting those that are deemed critical to the UK’s prosperity.
This will inform future funding arrangements.

35.

The Government is clear that it expects HEFCE to devise incentives to support the most
economically valuable programmes through contestable funding and channelling money
away from less valuable programmes. This could potentially include post-graduate training
in key sectors, if there is a strong demand from business. We have asked HEFCE to consult
the HE sector, but make rapid progress so that the new approach can be implemented in
2011-12.
●● (26) We support Skillset’s efforts to promote dialogue between the education
and training providers and the film, television and videogames industries. We
recommend that the Higher Education and Funding Council should encourage
closer relationships between universities and the creative industries, including
the introduction of sandwich courses for media studies degrees enabling
students to spend part or all of the penultimate year of their degree working in
the industry. (para 300)

36.

New Industry, New Jobs (NINJ) set out the need for a continued focus on areas of existing
economic strength and these include those driven by high levels of skills and creativity.

37.

Universities, HEFCE and the UK Commission for Employment and Skills must come
together to identify and tackle specific areas where university supply is not meeting the
demand for key skills. It is for individual universities to determine whether sandwich
courses are an appropriate response to such demand but, where this is part of any agreed
way forward, we would welcome this.

38.

However, in addition to using public funds to meet industry demand for skills, as the main
recipients of such skilled staff employers and businesses also need to contribute. This
could be through joint research programmes, vocationally orientated courses that they

8

part-fund, sponsorship of students and increased use of universities for management and
leadership training.
●● (27) We welcome the work that Skillset is doing on codes of conduct for
internships, and encourage them to play a greater role in the coordination of
apprenticeships and other on-the-job training. (para 312)
39.

The Government acknowledges that broadening access to entry routes to the creative
industries is a key priority. The success of the creative industries fundamentally depends
on a vibrant, highly skilled workforce of creative professionals from a diverse range
of different backgrounds. We join the committee in welcoming Skillset’s work on the
forthcoming guidelines for internships, work experience placements and apprenticeships,
following on from the Milburn report on Fair Access to the Professions.
●● (28) We urge the film and television industries to provide more equal access
to training and skills-based career development through greater use of
apprenticeships and graduate internships. (para 313)

40.

We are committed to working with our Sector Skills Councils and Non Departmental
Public Bodies and through them their sectors, to agree actions to promote a more diverse
work force. As part of diversifying the workforce across the creative industries, including
the film and television sectors, our ambitious aim is to create up to 5,000 apprenticeships
a year by 2013. These apprenticeship programmes are expected to diversify the pool
of entrants into the sector by opening up the entry points to the creative industries and
providing clear progression routes for young people and adults to employment.

41.

In addition to apprenticeships, across Government, we are looking at the potential for the
20,000 internships announced through Backing Young Britain to provide entry routes into
the creative industries, as well as the other NINJ sector.
●● (29) In the light of the variability of training across the sector, we welcome the
continuing role played by the BBC and the BBC’s willingness to make its training
more widely available through the launch of the BBC Academy. (para 317)
●● (30) We understand the current pressures on the budgets of UK commercial
public service broadcasters but believe that the reduction in training budgets
threatens the future competitiveness of the UK television industry. We urge
the Government to encourage PSBs to revive their investment in training.
(para 328)

42.

The scaling back of sector investment in skills and training is an issue which Skillset
have rightly raised in their discussions with Government. The Government recognises
the importance of continued investment, through the economic downturn, for the future
competitiveness of the UK television industry. We therefore accept the Committee’s
recommendation and will continue to encourage the PSBs to invest strongly in skills and
training across the industry.

43.

The BBC already has a formal obligation under its Agreement to contribute to the
preparation and maintenance of a highly skilled workforce across the audio-visual
industry, and continues to invest heavily in training programmes. For example, the BBC
spent £44.5 million on training in 2008 and the new BBC Academy has 200 staff and £40
million budget.

9

44.

As indicated in the Digital Britain White Paper, the Government is continuing to
work with Channel 4 and Skillset to ensure that Channel 4’s potential contribution to
engagement and development is fully realised. In addition, the Digital Economy Bill
includes an obligation on the Channel 4 Television Corporation (C4C), in carrying out its
new functions introduced by the Bill, to support the development of people with creative
talent, particularly those at the beginning of their careers and those involved in making
innovative content.
●● (31) We regret that, because of budgetary constraints, the UK Film Council
should be forced to reduce significantly its funding for training for the next three
years, at a time when training should be a priority. We urge the Government to
ensure that the UK Film Council is adequately funded to allow it at least to
restore its former level of support for training. (para 330)

45.

The Government recognises that the UK Film Council has done a great deal for film
skills training since its inception. Since the launch of its A Bigger Future strategy with
Skillset more than 16,000 opportunities for training have been created. Nurturing skills
and creative talent is listed as one of six core skills in their proposed three year plan and
will still receive £3.25 million in funding per year.

46.

We also recognise that the UK Film Council has been realistic about the amount of funding
that will be available to it over the next few years. The Film Council’s priority for skills
funding will be on training for new technologies (i.e. digital and 3D) and post-production.
This, together with the investment into skills by the Public Service Broadcasters, will help
to maintain the UK industry’s international lead in these areas.
●● (32) We welcome Ofcom’s proposals to develop co-operation within the
regulatory framework for training in the television industry and recommend
that Ofcom should publish guidance to clarify the roles of the organisations
involved. (para 334)

47.

10

Ofcom are working with Skillset and the Broadcast Training & Skills Regulator (BTSR)
on a framework agreement between the three bodies that will clarify their respective roles
and the ways in which they will co-operate. The proposals for the framework agreement
include ways of improving understanding amongst stakeholders about the roles of each of
the bodies. Government welcomes Ofcom’s engagement with Skillset and BTSR on this
framework agreement and supports the objectives this will seek to achieve.

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Tel 028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401

