DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to
The Culture, Media and Sport Select
Committee’s Report On Channel 4’s
Annual Report: Third Report of
Session 2009-10

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
March 2010

Cm 7858

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2010
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental
or agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium
providing it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The
material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please contact the Office of Public Sector
Information, Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or
e-mail: licensing@opsi.gsi.gov.uk.
ISBN: 978 0 10 178582 2
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2357792

03/10

2692

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Government Response to the Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee’s Report on Channel 4’s Annual Report:
Third Report of Session 2009-10
Introduction
The Government welcomes the report and has considered very carefully the evidence presented to
the Committee. The Government notes the conclusions and recommendations set out in the report
and is pleased to be able to present its response.
Recommendations 4 and 7-12 are for Channel 4 and the BBC to consider and it would be inappropriate
for the Government to comment, given the broadcasters’ independence.

Response to conclusions and recommendations
Digital Economy Bill
1. The impact on markets in which a public service broadcaster operates can be both positive and
negative. Much concern has been expressed – including by this Committee – about the negative
impact of the BBC as it has expanded both its public service and commercial activities. The
extension of Channel 4’s primary functions beyond the core PSB television channel, along with
the growth of its non-PSB activities, means the market impact this public organisation has might
increase significantly, raising questions about how this impact should be monitored and controlled.
We recommend that the Government consider and address these issues now, during the passage of
the Digital Economy Bill. (Paragraph 17)
The Government notes the Committee’s concerns about the potential market impact of
extending the Channel 4 Corporation’s (C4C’s) functions in the Digital Economy Bill. We
considered the market impact of the new C4C functions during the formulation of these
provisions, as part of the wider impact assessment published alongside the Bill (updated
following the House of Lords stages of the Bill: http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/corporate/
docs/d/10-810-digital-economy-bill-impact-assessments).
As noted in the impact assessment, C4C already have general powers to carry out activities
appropriate to and connected with its primary functions. C4C’s additional digital TV channels
and current new media services have been introduced under these powers, without any
dedicated market impact review framework and without giving rise to significant concerns
about their market impact.
The Government considers that the fundamental differences between C4C and the BBC, in
terms of source and scale of funding, mean that conclusions cannot necessarily be drawn
about appropriate levels of control for C4C services on the basis of concerns about the market
impact of BBC services. Unlike the BBC, C4C receive no public funding and must compete
in the market for their revenue. The principle is well established that C4C should seek to
maximise commercial revenue, including by the development of additional services, in order
to support the delivery of their public functions.
The new C4C functions introduced by the Bill do not extend C4C’s existing powers. Instead,
they provide a focus for C4C’s provision of media content, and flexibility for them to rebalance
their public service delivery across all digital platforms. This will enable C4C to respond to
technological developments and audience expectations and thus maximise the impact and
reach of their public service content.

1

C4C are, and will continue to be, bound by the Schedule 9 arrangements in the Communications
Act 2003. These provide for arrangements approved by Ofcom to be in place for ensuring that
all significant risks that commercial activities may have an adverse impact on the carrying out
of C4C’s primary functions are identified, evaluated and properly managed. C4C’s primary
functions will include the new duties introduced by the Bill. The requirements of the Schedule
are enforceable by Ofcom.
The Government does not therefore consider that there is a need for additional mechanisms
to monitor and control the market impact of C4C’s services.
2. We agree that any expansion of Channel 4’s remit, and any extension of its statutory public
service activities to services beyond its single traditional PSB service, the main Channel 4 television
channel, requires provisions for monitoring and enforcing the new functions. It is far from clear,
however, that the monitoring and enforcement provisions proposed will be the most appropriate and
effective means for achieving this. (Paragraph 22)
As the Committee notes, the Digital Economy Bill includes accountability and enforcement
arrangements to ensure delivery of C4C’s new obligations. These are based on the statements of
programme policy regime for licensed public service broadcasters, under the Communications
Act 2003. Under the new arrangements, C4C will be required to prepare annual statements of
media content policy, setting out how they propose to discharge their functions in the coming
year and reporting on their performance against the previous statement across their activities.
These requirements are additional to the public impact report introduced voluntarily by C4C
in 2009 as part of their Annual Report and Accounts, detailing the way in which C4C have
delivered their remit and containing statistical information about delivery and impact on the
core channel and across their other services.
Ofcom will have enforcement powers in relation to C4C’s fulfilment of their new duties.
Ofcom will also have a duty to review and report on the fulfilment of C4C’s new duties at the
same time as their reviews of the fulfilment of the public service remit under section 264 of the
Communications Act.
The Government believes these are robust, reasonable and proportionate measures to ensure
the delivery of C4C’s new functions.
3. Nor is it clear that the existing governance framework for Channel 4 is the most appropriate
for its proposed new status. While the BBC and Channel 4 retain different funding models, the
evolution of both as publicly-owned, not-for-profit multichannel, multiplatform public service
broadcasters, benefiting from direct and/or indirect public funding, calls into question the rationale
for maintaining dramatically different governance systems. (Paragraph 23)
The new C4C functions in the Digital Economy Bill will not affect the status of C4C’s additional
services (i.e. those beyond the licensed public service channel), nor will such services receive
any public funding or regulatory privileges. In addition, as explained above in relation to
Recommendation 1, the Government considers that the differences between C4C and the
BBC, in terms of scale and source of funding, make it difficult to draw any simple parallels in
relation to governance arrangements.
The C4C Board is responsible for ensuring that the Corporation fulfils its remit and for
overseeing its fiduciary responsibilities. Channel 4’s Chairman and Non-Executive Directors
are appointed by the independent regulator Ofcom, and subject to approval by the Secretary
of State. The Board agrees C4C strategy and oversees publication of the Annual Report and
Accounts and the Public Impact Report. The Schedule 9 arrangements described above in
relation to Recommendation 1 provide Ofcom with powers to ensure that C4C’s activities
are appropriate and consistent with the fulfilment of their public functions. C4C therefore
already have appropriate regulatory and governance arrangements in place.
Accordingly, the Government does not consider that a structural separation between the C4C
Board and Executive, on the lines of the BBC model, is either necessary or proportionate.

2

5. Moreover, we find this lack of transparency on its digital channels incompatible with Channel
4’s ambitions for them to be part of a public service network, as proposed in the Digital Economy
Bill. (Paragraph 40)
As explained above in relation to Recommendation 3, the new C4C functions introduced by
the Bill will not change the status of C4C’s additional services, nor will these receive any
public service privileges of the kind enjoyed by the licensed public service channel. C4C’s
new functions will give the Corporation the flexibility to deliver public service content across
a range of platforms where they can most effectively deliver public value, and will allow
Ofcom to take into account the role that these services play in contributing to the delivery
of C4C’s overall public purposes. However, these services will operate on a commercially
self-funded basis, competing for revenue in the market with, for example, other commercial
digital channel providers.
The Government understands that C4C have indicated to the Committee their concerns
about the publication of certain information relating to their additional digital channels, on
the grounds of commercial sensitivity, but that this information has been provided to the
Committee in confidence, while aggregated data on C4C’s digital-only services is published in
the C4C Annual Report and Accounts.
The new statements of media content policy that the Bill introduces, as well as C4C’s existing
reporting mechanisms through the Annual Report and Public Impact Report will ensure
transparency as regards the delivery of C4C’s new functions.
6. While in principle we support the inclusion of a public service broadcasting requirement relating
to older children in a revised Channel 4 remit, it is clear that Channel 4 did not achieve its aims of
demonstrating via a pilot fund its capability to commission engaging content that connects with its
intended audience, or successfully demonstrate what it could do with further resources. (Paragraph
49)
The Government notes the Committee’s comments on the gap between C4C’s ambitions, as
set out in ‘Next on 4’, and achievement in relation to the provision of children’s content. The
context for this was the unprecedented decline in the TV advertising market that followed the
announcement of C4C’s proposals.
However, the Government remains committed to supporting the provision of public service
content for children. One of the purposes of the new C4C functions is to focus C4C’s public
service activities on areas of particular public value where commercial provision is under
pressure. We are giving C4C a specific obligation, which they have not had previously but
which builds on their strong connection with younger audiences, to provide content that
appeals to the tastes and interests of older children and young adults.
It will be for the C4C Board to decide how this new duty can best be fulfilled, in the light of
the financial challenges facing Channel 4 as a commercially-funded entity.

3

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Tel 028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401

