DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the House
of Lords Select Committee on
Communications Report into Digital
Switchover of Television and Radio in the
United Kingdom Session 2009-10

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
June 2010

Cm 7876

£5.75

© Crown Copyright 2010
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental
or agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium
providing it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context.
The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the
document specified.
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please contact the Office of Public Sector
Information, Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or
e-mail: licensing@opsi.gsi.gov.uk.
ISBN: 978 0 10 178762 8
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2372065

06/10

3612

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Government Response to the House of Lords Select
Committee on Communications Report into Digital
Switchover of Television and Radio in The United Kingdom
Introduction
1. The Government welcomes the report by the Lords Select Committee on Communications into
digital switchover of television and radio published on 29 March 2010.
2. The report provides a detailed consideration and assessment of many of the issues that have
emerged from the implementation of the TV Switchover programme, and the Government welcomes
the Committee’s view that progress so far has been encouraging.
3. The report also explores the broad range of issues to be considered in any future transition from
analogue to digital radio. An overarching theme in the Committee’s recommendation is the need for
clarity for consumers. We agree that this is important. As the Government develops and implements
its policies on a transition to digital radio we will seek to ensure that the needs of consumers are at
the centre of our considerations. Where decisions are made we will work with the industry so that
these are clearly and consistently communicated to consumers.
4. Government has carefully considered all the recommendations made by the Committee and this
document represents its response.

Conclusions and recommendations
5. Recommendations at paragraphs 145, 146 and 148 are directed at Digital UK, the not-for-profit
company set up by broadcasters to implement TV switchover. Digital UK will be responding to the
Committee directly on these points.
We recommend that the details of the Help Scheme’s aftercare are communicated clearly by
the Digital Switchover Help Scheme to relevant voluntary sector organisations as well as to
Help Scheme beneficiaries. (para 82)
6. The Government and the Help Scheme agree that the Help Scheme’s aftercare arrangements
must be communicated effectively to voluntary sector organisations. The Help Scheme aftercare
offer is communicated to customers in the Options Pack sent to all eligible customers around 6
months before Switchover, and reiterated by the installer at the point of installation. The Consumer
Expert Group, made up of key consumer stakeholder organisations, are involved in agreeing content
for each regional Options Pack.
7. Key voluntary sector organisations involved in assisting the delivery of the Scheme receive
training on the Help Scheme offer, including on the aftercare service. The lead voluntary sector
organisations involved in delivering the Scheme in each region are identified by Digital Outreach
Limited (DOL). The training consists of workshops delivered by DOL and Help Scheme staff.
8. Help Scheme stakeholders receive a quarterly e-bulletin which makes clear the Help Scheme
offer (including the12 months of aftercare). The Help Scheme website www.helpscheme.co.uk
explains the standard offer, including the 12 month aftercare service.

1

We strongly regret that the cost benefit analysis carried out by PricewaterhouseCoopers was
not published at the time it was delivered to Ofcom and the Department for Culture Media
and Sport in February 2009. (para 99)
9. The Cost Benefit Analysis produced by PricewaterhouseCoopers, to accompany the work of
the Digital Radio Working Group, was widely distributed amongst broadcasters and consumer
representatives. However, there were technical difficulties which prevented the initial publication of
the report on the DCMS website; these were rectified and the report published in February 2010.
We recommend that the full impact assessment, including the cost benefit analysis of digital
radio, be commissioned by the Government and carried out as soon as practicable and that
the results be published. (para 100)
10. We agree that a full impact assessment is an essential part of informing the Government’s
decision on whether and when to move from a primarily analogue to a digital radio landscape. Work
has already begun to collect the evidence needed to support an impact assessment and analysis
should begin shortly.
Given the importance for the Government’s plans for digital switchover of universal reception
of the BBC’s national stations, it is essential that a firm and unambiguous plan and funding
for the completion of build-out of the BBC’s national multiplex is put in place as soon as
possible. (para 107)
11. In order to agree a plan for DAB coverage build-out, so that it can ultimately meet the current
levels of FM coverage, Ofcom have been asked to form a Coverage and Spectrum Planning Group
to make recommendation on the following:
• the current coverage of national and local radio on FM;
• changes to the current multiplex structure and frequency allocation; and
• what new infrastructure is needed so that DAB can match FM.
Ofcom are expected to present their recommendation to Government in Spring 2011.
While we acknowledge that the current financial problems of commercial radio make further
build-out of the national commercial multiplex difficult at this time, we urge the Government
to ensure that, in due course, it is extended in line with the Digital Radio Working Group’s
proposal. (para 108)
12. Coverage of the national commercial DAB multiplex already broadly matches the coverage
of the national commercial service on FM, although it has been suggested that improvements need
to be made to the quality of indoor reception and, where possible, overall coverage. However, the
roll-out of the national commercial multiplex is ultimately a decision for the multiplex operator.
We recommend that, as a matter of urgency, the Government, the BBC and commercial radio
agree a plan and allocation of funding responsibility for local multiplex build-out in order that
local DAB coverage can be raised to 90 per cent. (para 111)
13. Once the Coverage and Spectrum Planning Group and the industry have agreed a plan for
DAB coverage build-out, the Government, the BBC and commercial radio can agree the allocation
of costs for the build-out. These discussions can begin once Ofcom has made its recommendation
on the scale of the necessary build-out of DAB infrastructure in Spring 2011.
We recommend that the Government commissions and urgently publishes a report on the
state of the FM network, what investment might be required to keep the network functioning
and where any maintenance costs would fall. (para 112)

2

14. The Government recognises that a strong local and community radio tier is an important part of
a healthy local media sector. It does not believe that future investment in maintaining infrastructure
is a threat to the continued provision of these radio services on FM, therefore there is no need for
such a report at this time.
We urge the Government to clarify its longer term policy on the use of FM and AM for radio
broadcasting. (para 115)
15. In the event of a move to digital, a proportion of the FM frequency will need to be reserved for
radio services, specifically small commercial and community radio services, which have no obvious
route to digital. Therefore, we believe that the future for small local and community radio stations
will be on analogue for the foreseeable future.
We recommend that the Government seeks assurances from the electronics industry on when
a single electronic programme guide will be available. The Government should include these
assurances in the advice it issues to consumers on digital switchover. (para 117)
16. The technology needed to provide an integrated radio station guide, similar to an Electronic
Programme Guide, already exists. The Government recognises the benefits of such a guide to
consumers and will work closely with manufacturers with the aim of encouraging the implementation
and promotion of an integrated station guide in a wide range of radio receivers.
17. The Government believes that the industry could do more to make consumers aware of the
benefits of digital radio. This will need to be addressed if take-up and listening to digital radio is to
continue to grow.
We recommend that the Government should work with manufacturers to ensure that digital
car radios are fitted with multi-standard chips as soon as possible and inform consumers of
availability and benefits of digital radios containing the multi-standard chip. (para 120)
18. Work with manufacturers and the automotive industry to support the implementation of digital
radio receivers in vehicles is ongoing and we will continue to encourage the implementation of digital
radio as standard in all new vehicles. On the specific issue of implementing a multi-standard chip
for in-vehicle radios, we note that the automotive industry operates in a pan-European market and
there would be little benefit in vehicle manufacturers incorporating technologies which didn’t work
across Europe. We are therefore confident that manufacturers will willingly choose to implement
multi-standard receivers in vehicles in the future.
We recommend that the Government, in collaboration with the manufacturers, should provide
guidance to the public on in-car digital listening, including advice on conversion kits available
and likely to be available within the timeframe of digital switchover. (para 122)
19. Government recognises the importance of clear and consistent guidance for consumers to
help inform their future buying decisions; specifically when considering conversion of existing
in-vehicle radios. We will continue to work with manufacturers and broadcasters to facilitate a
comprehensive information campaign for listeners, which will be updated as the market develops.
We recommend that, as a matter of urgency, the Government should liaise with the vehicle
manufacturers to provide clarity on how traffic reports will be provided to motorists with
digital radios and built-in satellite navigation systems, thus allowing manufacturers to
incorporate this into their vehicle development. (para 123)

3

20. Government acknowledges the importance of traffic and travel services to motorists and will
continue to work closely with manufacturers to ensure the continuation of these services to both
digital and analogue radio receivers.
The Government must ensure that advice goes to retailers and the public that when purchasing
radios, consumers should purchase sets that include a digital tuner. This will prevent the
problem getting worse. The Government should encourage the industry to devise a sensible
scrappage scheme, recognising that the industry, manufacturers and retailers, will benefit
heavily from the new sales generated by digital switchover. We recommend that the Government
inform consumers as soon as possible as to how the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment
(WEEE) regulations will operate for disposal of analogue radios. (para 126)
21. The Government recognises the need to ensure that retailers are able to provide reliable advice
to consumers when purchasing a new radio, specifically the benefits of purchasing a digital radio. To
this end we will be working with broadcasters and manufacturers to ensure retailers fully understand
the Government’s policies for digital radio.
22. The Government is committed to ensuring that the WEEE Directive is appropriately applied
in any disposal of analogue radios. We have already begun work with the relevant Government
Departments to assess current disposal practices for small electrical waste and to provide clear
advice for consumers, manufacturers and retailers.
23. We note that the radio industry has launched a scrappage scheme in the lead-up to the football
World Cup. This will provide a useful insight into the practicalities of running such a scheme and
the issue of reconditioning and recycling old analogue devices.
We recommend that the Government should make clear to the public that DAB will remain
the digital radio standard for Digital Radio Upgrade. (para 128)
At the same time, we recommend that the Government should set a date by which all new
digital radios should contain the multi-standard chip, giving the UK the option of a subsequent
move to a different standard. We also recommend that the cost benefit analysis, which the
Government has undertaken to carry out, should include an analysis of the costs and benefits
of a subsequent move to another standard. (para 129)
24. DAB listening represents the majority of all digital listening, 15% (RAJAR Q1 2010), and is
likely to remain the technology of choice for broadcasters and listeners for the foreseeable future.
There are no plans at this time to introduce DAB+, although we recognise there are benefits in
ensuring receivers sold in the future would support any such change of technology.
25. The cost benefit analysis of a transition to digital radio will need to take account of all areas of
the government’s proposals, including, if appropriate, a possible future transition to DAB+.
We recommend an early and extensive information campaign to publicise the Government’s
digital radio policy, its rationale and its implications for listeners. (para 131)
26. The Government is working with Digital Radio UK to develop a clear and consistent
communications plan to improve listeners’ awareness of digital radio, the benefits of the technology
and the services available.
We recommend that, as a matter of urgency, the Government, Digital Radio UK, representatives
of the electrical manufacturing and retailing industries, and representatives of the vehicle
manufacturing and retailing industries should agree advice to consumers about purchase of
digital radio equipment. We also recommend the introduction of a “kitemarking” scheme for
digital radios, to include information on power consumption. (para 132)

4

We recommend that the Government explains in a public communications campaign on
digital radio that, while DAB radios will continue to operate for the foreseeable future, radios
containing the multi-standard chip will provide insurance against a future change of digital
standard and will also work on the continent of Europe. (para 133)
27. A kitemark scheme is an effective way of providing assurances to consumers about the
quality of their devices. Clearly any kitemarking scheme would need to be underpinned by a clear
set of receiver specifications and a conformance testing regime. We believe that this minimum
receiver specification should include capability to receive both DAB and DAB+, to protect against
a future change of technology. Work has already begun with manufacturers and the industry to
agree a common set of specifications and the mechanisms for testing; once these are agreed and
implemented, discussion on an appropriate labelling scheme can begin.
We recommend that the Government confirms as soon as possible that a help scheme with
special focus on disadvantaged groups will be part of the Digital Radio Upgrade programme.
In this case, funding should be raised through general taxation, not through the licence fee.
(para 134)
28. A comprehensive impact assessment, including a cost benefit analysis, will be required before
any date for a transition to digital can be set. The findings of the cost benefit analysis will help
inform whether a Help Scheme to support a transition is necessary, what its purposes should be,
how much it might cost and how to best publicise it.
We recommend that the Government and broadcasters consider how increased production
and dissemination of digital radio content can be encouraged. (para 137)
29. Government agrees with the Committee’s view that an increase of digital content will be a
key driver to the take-up of digital radio. However, this is primarily a matter for the broadcasters
themselves; although we believe that certainty about the future of digital radio will help broadcasters
invest in new content with greater confidence.

5

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Tel 028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401

