DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the
Culture, Media and Sport Committee
Report on the Future for Local and
Regional Media

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
June 2010

Cm 7882

£5.75

© Crown Copyright 2010
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental
or agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium
providing it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context.
The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the
document specified.
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
ISBN: 978 0 10 178822 9
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2373930

06/10

3823

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Government response to the Culture, Media and
Sport Committee Report on the Future for Local and
Regional Media
The Government welcomes the Committee’s report: Future for local and regional media.
The Government is grateful to the Committee for its inquiry into local and regional media and
welcomes the detailed consideration the Committee has given and the extent of evidence it has
taken in formulating its conclusions and recommendations.
The Government has carefully considered all the recommendations and is delighted to present its
response.

Regional and Local Newspapers
1. We welcome the BBC’s proposals to increase the number of external links on their websites.
We recommend that every local BBC website should link to the local newspaper websites for
that area. (Paragraph 37)
While this is a matter for the BBC, the Government would welcome any changes to local BBC
websites which enabled local people to easily access a range of local information from different
websites .
2. The long term impact of the recent loss of advertising income streams on local newspapers
remains to be seen. The economic downturn shows signs of recovery, and this should manifest
itself in some recovery of advertising revenues for local newspapers. However the adverse
impact that the growth and popularity of the internet has had on newspaper purchasing and
advertising does not look set to reverse. There is a significant generational shift in reading
habits, and the internet is fostering a younger generation of electronic news consumers on
which newspapers need to capitalise. (Paragraph 40)
The Government recognises the challenges facing local newspapers as a result of fragmenting
audiences and shifts in advertising revenues. This challenge is increasingly being met head on
by some newspapers who are seeking to commercialise or change their distribution patterns and
traditional business models. The Government recently accepted Ofcom’s recommendation to relax
the rules on cross media ownership and intends to go further in helping local newspapers adopt new
cross platform business models that demonstrate robust viability in the digital age.
3. Local newspapers have recently suffered from an unprecedented downturn in revenues.
Some local newspaper publishers have profited from diversifying their online presence with
advertising websites such as Jobsite and Fish4, however, the industry is still in a precarious
position. The state subsidy of national and local newspapers, as has been seen recently in
France, is not the solution. Newspapers should remain independent of state funding and
control and attempt to profit from diversifying their online presence as best as they can.
(Paragraph 41)
Newspapers at all levels have an important role in the democratic process in the UK. The Government
agrees with the Committee that newspapers should remain independent of state funding and control
and does not intend to subsidise newspapers.

1

4. The evidence we have heard from local media groups about the need to modify the merger
regime and cross-media ownership rules is persuasive. We welcome the recommendations
made by Ofcom in their report to the Secretary of State on media cross-ownership rules, and
urge the Government to implement them. However we believe more far-reaching reform is
needed. In order for local newspapers to survive in a changing economic and technological
world, they need to be regarded as competitors in a multi-media landscape. Despite the
evidence given by the Office of Fair Trading, we believe that the current media merger regime
does not fully reflect this. We recommend that the Government re-examine the arrangement
by carrying out a consultation on a possible multi-media merger regime. (Paragraph 57)
The Government is bringing forward secondary legislation to liberalise the cross-media ownership
rules at the local level as quickly as possible following Ofcom’s recommendations and the Secretary
of State’s speech on 8 June. The Government agrees with the Select Committee and is currently
examining whether further liberalisation of media merger rules should be implemented at a local
level.
5. There is a real problem with local authority newspapers and magazines that needs to be
addressed. While it is clear that most of these publications, such as Portsmouth City Council’s
Flagship, are legitimate communications from a council to its citizens, this cannot be said for
all local authority publications. Publications such as Hammersmith and Fulham Borough
Council’s H&F News effectively pose as, and compete with, local commercial newspapers and
are misleading to the public. It is unacceptable that a local authority can set up a newspaper
in direct competition to the local commercial newspaper in this way. Nor should any council
publication be a vehicle for political propaganda. (Paragraph 73)
6. The current DCLG guidance in this area is currently being breached. The DCLG should
set up a system to monitor this situation closely. However we believe these guidelines, even if
adhered to, do not go far enough. There should be specific, detailed guidance for local authority
newspapers and magazines which should state that it be mandatory that all publications of
this type make clear, not only on the front page but throughout the publication, that they are
a local authority publication. (Paragraph 74)
Councils should be at the heart of providing innovative and better value services to the public. Local
councils are under a duty to communicate with their local communities on matters such as planning
applications and other statutory notices. In addition, many councils choose to communicate with
the local public in innovative and engaging ways that reduce costs for the council tax payer. Good
communication between a council and its community is an essential part of ensuring an informed
democracy.
However, plural independent local media are essential to hold locally elected politicians to
account.
The Coalition Agreement states that the Government intend to impose tougher rules to stop unfair
competition by local authority newspapers. The Government is consulting interested parties about
these concerns and decisions will be announced in due course.
7. The Audit Commission’s review of council publications did not examine the impact that
council newspapers are having on commercial local newspapers. We agree with the Audit
Commission that it is not their role to do so. We recommend that the Office of Fair Trading
should conduct a review specifically on the impact of council publications on commercial local
newspapers. (Paragraph 75)
The Office of Fair trading may consider any issues of genuinely novel or unresolved issues of
competition law. However, it is open to local newspaper groups to take legal advice on such matters
accordingly.
The Office of Fair trading has stated that if it were approached by newspaper groups with evidence
of commercial or consumer harm it would investigate further.

2

8. The importance of reporting on local institutions and local democracy cannot be overstated;
without it there is little democratic accountability. This reporting must be independent and
good quality in order to inform the public and maintain their confidence. (Paragraph 87)
9. Therefore we welcome the Press Association’s proposals for public service reporting and
the launch of their pilot project. This model could alleviate some of the pressure on local
newspapers and could well be a solution to the gap that has emerged as local papers are
increasingly too under-resourced to report on the daily activities in courts and local authorities.
(Paragraph 88)
10. Despite the bleak reports we have heard about the future for local newspapers, we believe
they will still be relevant for some time to come, not least because there is still a population of
newspaper readers as well as digital ‘have-nots’. However, to survive local newspapers need
to innovate and invest in new technologies. Now more than ever people are turning to the
internet and digital media for their news, providing an opportunity to for local newspapers to
capitalise on their positions as longstanding local content providers. (Paragraph 89)
11. For a long time local newspapers have made relatively little change to their business
models. Now, along with the other traditional media platforms of television and radio, they
face a vast array of digital and internet services, providing relatively easy market entry, all
vying for advertising revenue and readerships. While some economic factors are cyclical,
other changes of a structural nature are likely to be permanent. As is clear from the evidence
we have heard from local newspapers themselves, local newspapers must innovate and reevaluate the traditional model of local print media in order to survive in the new digital era.
(Paragraph 90)
12. It is anachronistic to distinguish between broadcast and non-broadcast journalism.
There is a convergence towards multi-platform news journalism and therefore access to video
footage of national events, which often have a local or regional angle, should not be exclusive
to broadcasters. The BBC, ITN and Sky are all able to use the broadcast pool content online as
well as on television and it is against the public interest to deny local and regional newspapers
this opportunity. (Paragraph 96)
13. There needs to be clarity regarding who has access to footage from, what are currently,
single camera assignments. If the members of the broadcast pool are not prepared to make
the content available to the Press Association at a reasonable cost, then the Government
should ensure the right of access for the Press Association digital pool reporters alongside the
broadcast pool at national events. (Paragraph 97)
The Government agrees with the Committee that plurality in news is vital because it provides a
range of voices and perspectives that people need and value. News and journalism help hold to
account public institutions such as local authorities, health, education or police authorities and the
courts. As this Government seeks to devolve more powers to local authorities and communities,
local media will be even more important in holding these to account. The transparency and open
data agenda will also give local media more information to consider, especially when councils start
publishing all spending over £500.
The Government understands that following discussions, the BBC, ITN and Sky have agreed that
all news organisations, including the Press Association, should be given access to broadcast pool
material and be able to purchase the footage.

3

Regional News on Television
14. Existing, and potential further, reductions in regional news on channel 3 have serious
implications for the maintenance of plurality of regional news on television We are deeply
concerned that ITV is already running into deficit with its PSB obligations for regional news
production, and has suggested that, if left unaddressed, ITV may walk away from these. We
welcome reports that the new Chairman of ITV may be reconsidering this strategy, but believe
that, to support this, the PSB obligations and other regulatory burdens on ITV need to be
reduced, if not removed. (Paragraph 114)
15. The situation with regional news on Channel 3 is in danger of reaching a crisis point that
could jeopardise the plurality of regional television news. To protect this, a way of ensuring the
continuation of a regional news service on Channel 3 needs to be found, offering an additional
and alternative service to that provided by the BBC. It is unacceptable for there to be any
situation in which the public is reliant on only one provider, the BBC, for regional television
news. (Paragraph 135)
16. We therefore welcome the launch of the IFNC pilots. However, given the lack of crossparty support for IFNCs, their future is highly uncertain. (Paragraph 136)
17. It is vital that there is a continuation of a regional news service on Channel 3 until the
introduction of IFNCs, and we are concerned that the time lag until IFNCs become fully
functioning in 2013 may lead to a worrying deficit. If it is not financially viable for existing
Channel 3 licensees to provide this service because the cost of doing so exceeds the value of
their licences then other, non-regional, obligations of those licensees should be partially or
completely suspended, in order to alleviate the financial burden and to ensure the continuation
of regional news by existing Channel 3 licensees. (Paragraph 137)
18. Given the importance, of regional television news, we recommend that the final regulatory
provisions for IFNCs make clear the priority that must be accorded to the replacement of
the regional television news service within the respective Channel 3 regions, with provision
via internet services and other outlets provided on an additional and complementary basis,
although we recommend that the IFNC selection panel favour bids that also contain radio
provision. (Paragraph 138)
The IFNC pilot procurement process developed by the previous administration had the benefit of
stimulating innovative approaches among media companies. However, this Government believes
the IFNC proposition is the wrong intervention. Public subsidy should not be used to prop up either
failing business models or trying to meet the costs of regulatory obligations placed on commercial
providers. Subsidy for regional news providers will not provide the right incentive for commercially
sustainable local media.
Instead, the Government is looking at options for creating commercially sustainable local television
as part of a healthy local media sector in the UK. The Government will be looking carefully at the
issues around content, technical constraints and regulation as part of this work and intends to bring
forward changes as quickly as possible.
Changes to PSB licence obligations and the implications of such changes are a matter for Ofcom in
accordance with its statutory duties.
19. We are sceptical about ITV plc’s support for IFNCs being contingent on their retaining
the advertising in regional news slots as they also argue that there is little revenue to be gained
from advertising around news. If the cost of fulfilling regional news vastly exceeds the revenue
involved, we can see no reason why this small advertising revenue should not be allowed to
help fund replacement for Channel 3 news providers. We recommend Ofcom and the OFT
conduct more research on this. (Paragraph 139)

4

Ofcom are currently reviewing the airtime sales rules which looks at the ways broadcasters sell
bundles of airtime for advertising. The outcome of this review will have significant implications for
commercial public service broadcasters potentially having greater liberty to maximise commercial
revenues from advertising. Ofcom’s consultation closed on 7 June 2010 and they will report in due
course.
20. The television licence fee is collected in order to fund public service television, which
is not confined to the output of the BBC. Plurality of regional news provision is vital in a
democracy, therefore we restate our support for the principle of public funding, and note the
Government’s existing suggestion that this could be met from that part of the income of the
licence fee that is currently allocated to the digital switchover help scheme. (Paragraph 146)
21. Whatever the outcome of the discussions with Ofcom, plurality in local media must be the
priority in any future partnerships that are forged between the BBC and other media groups.
It would not be acceptable for a single news agenda to become the norm in the UK, whether
it is driven by the BBC or anyone else. However the sharing of resources and experience
in order to make cost efficiencies should be encouraged. The BBC should not expect extra
funding in order to do this. (Paragraph 158)
22. We welcome Sir Michael Lyons’ acknowledgement that the BBC has a duty to help other
broadcasters although the BBC needs to be clearer about what this means in practice. We
also believe that such a duty should be included in the BBC Charter However we would not
support an expansion of public intervention or funding of the BBC in order for it to help other
broadcasters. (Paragraph 159)
The Government welcomes the work the BBC has undertaken in partnership with other broadcasters
and encourages the Corporation to seek further opportunities of this nature. The Government has no
intention, however, of providing the BBC with any additional funding to support such initiatives.
23. It is unfortunate that the agreement between STV and ITV has deteriorated to the
point where it has turned into a legal dispute. This can only be damaging to Channel 3.
(Paragraph 167)
24. We regret that ITV did not take up the offer made by Ofcom to arbitrate in these matters.
This is now a matter for the courts. Whatever the outcome we hope that it will clarify the
network agreement and prevent any legal dispute in the future. (Paragraph 168)

Local Radio
25. We support Ofcom’s proposals for deregulation, and support the notion that the localness
of local radio is ultimately marked by its output. Local commercial radio stations should be
able to co-locate if it is in the interests of cost efficiency and preserving a service to those local
areas. (Paragraph 179)
The Digital Economy Act 2010 has relaxed the rules governing the local radio market, with the
intention of promoting greater cost efficiencies, whilst retaining the provision of local content
which listeners value. These changes have replaced the requirement that local radio stations be
located within their licensed area with a much broader requirement to be located within a larger
‘approved area’. This relaxation allows two or more local stations to co-locate studios and facilities
so reducing the fixed costs of these businesses.
Local stations may also request a reduction in the number of locally made programme hours from 10
to 7 a day, provided they commit to providing up to date local news bulletins throughout daytimes
on weekdays. This should have the effect of providing the flexibility to reduce the financial burden
of developing local content, whilst safeguarding local news provision, which is highly valued by
listeners. We will continue to keep the regulatory burden on commercial radio under review.

5

26. Striking the right level of localness in the local commercial radio sector is the key to
its sustainability. In order to survive, commercial radio stations need to profit from their
advertising revenue which will be spread too thinly if there are too many stations in an area
or region. The local content of commercial radio is one of its most important attributes. It
is worrying that so many smaller stations are currently operating at a loss, although the
evidence we have heard suggests that this is in part because of an unsustainable expansion
in the industry. Radio stations with coverage of less than 250,000 people are in a precarious
position at the moment and we are concerned that this could result in a deficit of local content
on the radio. (Paragraph 189)
27. However, the radio platform lends itself to providing hyper-local content in the form
of community radio, and this is to be encouraged. The growing number of community radio
stations are providing a valuable service that often caters to a specific demographic. We
welcome Ofcom’s encouragement of hyper-local content on radio and we believe that this will
eventually become an important tier of local media. (Paragraph 190)
The Government agrees that a strong local commercial radio sector needs to include content which
is specifically relevant to local audiences. Relevant local content remains a key component of the
local radio licensing and regulatory regimes.
We also agree that community radio makes an important contribution to the local media landscape
and this should, where local markets can sustain such stations, be actively encouraged.
28. It is important that ownership regulation reflects the modern media landscape. We
therefore support Ofcom’s proposed changes to local ownership rules, and the provisions in
the Digital Economy Bill that will take forward changes to the ownership rules for commercial
radio. It is in the interests of plurality, and therefore the consumer that local commercial
radio stations should have the ability to merge with other media ventures and utilise other
platforms. (Paragraph 194)
29. It is undeniable that local commercial radio is a very important source of local news for
a lot of people. As with local newspapers, local radio news, on both the BBC and commercial
stations, is a training ground for new journalistic talent and provides news content that often
becomes part of the national news agenda. The current economic pressures affecting local
radio are making the provision of local news quite challenging for local radio stations and
urgent deregulation of the ownership rules must be implemented. (Paragraph 200)
The Government has accepted Ofcom’s recommended changes to the local ownership rules and
intends to bring forward the necessary secondary legislation as soon as possible.
30. The digital switchover should be of great benefit to all levels of local commercial radio.
We particularly welcome the development of a new tier of hyper-local community radio that
will occupy the FM spectrum to be vacated by larger stations who upgrade to DAB. However
we do acknowledge concerns from the industry about local radio stations in rural and/or
coastal areas that could struggle to get DAB coverage. We therefore recommend that Ofcom
be empowered to make exceptions and that, as and where necessary, the FM spectrum should
be shared between commercial and community radio. (Paragraph 209)
At present there is insufficient capacity on some local DAB multiplexes to allow all local and
community radio stations currently broadcasting on analogue to move to DAB. It is not the
intention that these stations are forced to close as the result of a transition to digital; therefore we
are committed to reserving a proportion of FM for small local and community stations with no
obvious route onto digital.

6

31. We welcome the ongoing discussions that the BBC is having with local commercial
radio on the possibilities of forming partnerships. Where a partnership would result in cost
efficiencies, or technological advancements then it is to be encouraged. However we are
sympathetic to the cautious greeting that the BBC’s partnership proposals received from the
local radio industry. The competition the BBC receives from commercial radio at a local level
is vital. What is more important than partnerships is plurality and we believe that some of the
deregulatory proposals outlined by Ofcom are the key to preserving this. (Paragraph 215)
The Government agrees it is important that the BBC receives strong competition from local
commercial radio. Most recently, the Digital Economy Act 2010 introduced deregulatory measures
to strengthen commercial radio at the local level.
32. We are not convinced by RadioCentre’s assertions that music licences for radios in the
workplace are either being aggressively collected, or are contributing to a downturn in radio
listening. Performing artists have a right to earn from their work and the cost to businesses
playing a radio is not unreasonable. (Paragraph 218)

Local Media Online
33. We acknowledge the concerns local newspaper publishers have about news aggregation.
At a time when there are such significant changes in the way that people consume their news,
user-friendly mechanisms that offer consumers the ability to scan headlines from, and click
through to, a vast range of alternative news sources must appear to be a targeted threat to the
traditional media formats. (Paragraph 236)
34. We are concerned at local newspaper groups’ claims that they are unable to undertake
any collective industry discussions about the issues raised by aggregators without it breaching
competition law. We recommend that this apparent restriction be considered by the Office of
Fair Trading and that guidance is given, as appropriate, on the extent to which such discussions
can be held without being deemed anti-competitive. (Paragraph 237)
The OFT will consider providing industry with relevant guidance in respect of competition law as
and when approaches are made. The Government would welcome such considerations.
35. We welcome Google’s recent changes to Google News and Google Web Search
regarding the number of articles which can be freely accessed on sites requiring subscription
or registration. While Google’s success in news aggregation has been achieved through
innovation rather than aggression and is not in breach of international copyright laws, its
changes demonstrate a welcome awareness of the problems faced by local newspapers and
other traditional publishers. It seems clear that Google’s business is having a significant
impact on traditional publishers’ economic models and so we welcome new facilities such as
Fast Flip and hope Google is sensitive to the need to maintain diverse, pluralistic sources of
local news and information. (Paragraph 238)
36. We agree with the Office of Fair Trading’s assessment of Google’s position in the
media landscape: Google has achieved its dominant status from successful innovation and
investment in online technologies and services which has provided significant consumer
benefits. (Paragraph 244)

7

37. Local newspaper publishers have been very critical of Google, yet their criticisms have, in
our view, lacked focus. Newspapers can opt out of Google News and Web Search, and Google
has made attempts to work with newspaper publishers by facilitating the advertising for
their websites, which we welcome. We recognise that the changes being brought in the online
world are creating huge disruption to the traditional business models of local newspapers and
other media companies, resulting in both threats and opportunities. Where there are clear
problems that can be addressed by public policy changes and regulatory intervention, we can
recommend that action be taken. However we have not heard any evidence that suggests this
is the case with the complaints from newspaper publishers about Google. (Paragraph 245)
38. The benefits of online technologies for consumers are considerable, and the appeal of the
internet for advertisers is only likely to increase. The competition for readers and advertising
revenues on the internet is fierce given the lower costs of entry into the online world, compared
with entry into print media. (Paragraph 251)
39. However there are encouraging developments that could help local news publishers to
become multi-platform news providers. IFNCs could offer a shared skill and resource base
that would help local newspapers make the transition to becoming online publishers as well as
print publishers. We also note that some publishers are experimenting with different business
models for the provision of online content. (Paragraph 252)
40. Hyper-local blogs and websites can offer a valuable service to local communities. Their
greatest qualities are their interactivity with their readership and the exchange of local
information and discussion that they facilitate. At a time when some local newspapers are
struggling to survive, some local blogs are beginning to fill the gaps that a receding local press
is leaving behind. Hyper-local websites can potentially also be good for maintaining local
identity and can provide healthy scrutiny and discussion of local democracy and local issues,
which is to be encouraged. (Paragraph 261)
41. Local newspapers can learn from many of these innovative websites, and in some
cases there is an argument that local newspapers should be working alongside them. However
this is not to say that local newspapers are no longer relevant. There is still, and will always
be, a need for local professional journalism. Local newspapers will retain a role and a
relevance particularly for the segments of society that do not, or cannot, use the internet.
(Paragraph 262)
42. We endorse the sentiment that it is local journalism, rather than local newspapers,that
needs saving. The two are far from mutually exclusive, but newspapers need to be innovative
in the way they train their journalists to work in a multi-platform world. (Paragraph 263)
The Government believes that local journalism and local content remains fundamentally important
for our society. The Government wants to see local television services emerge on a commercially
sustainable basis and across media platforms. There is huge scope for innovation at this level with
opportunities for citizen involvement and the development of skills and training. The Government
intends to develop these proposals over the coming months and consult on this in due course.

8

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/general enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square,
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/general enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Telephone orders/general enquiries: 028 9023 8451
Fax orders: 028 9023 5401

