DEPARTMENT FOR CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT

Government Response to the
Northern Ireland Affairs Committee
Report on Television Broadcasting in
Northern Ireland: 3rd report of Session
2009/10

Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
March 2010

Cm 7846

£5.50

© Crown Copyright 2010
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental
or agency logos) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium
providing it is reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The
material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the document specified.
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please contact the Office of Public Sector
Information, Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or
e-mail: licensing@opsi.gsi.gov.uk.
ISBN: 978 0 10 178462 7
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2356866

03/10 2561

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Government Response to the Northern Ireland
Affairs Committee Report on Television Broadcasting
in Northern Ireland: Third Report of Session 2009-10
Introduction

The Government welcomes the report and has considered very carefully the evidence presented to
the Committee. The Government notes the conclusions and recommendations set out in the report
and is pleased to be able to present its response.
Recommendations 4 and 15 are for the BBC to consider and it would be inappropriate for the
Government to comment, given the Corporation’s independence.

Response to conclusions and recommendations
1.

We recommend that the Department for Culture, Media and Sport takes more care to
include Northern Ireland in its future thinking and documentation on UK-wide broadcasting.
(Paragraph 8)

2.

We recommend that the Minister for Creative Industries visits Northern Ireland as soon as
possible, and thereafter, at least once a year subsequently to become fully acquainted with
the broadcast environment there. As long as broadcasting in Northern Ireland remains the
responsibility of the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, we recommend that that
Department attempts, at the very least, to build some confidence in Northern Ireland that it is
properly and fully aware of its responsibilities. (Paragraph 9)

The Government is fully aware of its responsibilities and is generally satisfied that broadcasting
policy does have due regard to Northern Ireland.
The Committee may wish to be aware that the process of producing the Digital Britain
White Paper included a stakeholder event in Northern Ireland. The White Paper itself
included a recommendation intended to benefit television production in the Nations, including
Northern Ireland, and also highlighted the work being done to promote media literacy in
Northern Ireland.
Nonetheless, the Department notes the Committee’s recommendations and will keep them in
mind in developing future policies.
3.

We attach fundamental importance to the continuity of service and we therefore urge the UK
Government to ensure that its discussions with the Government of the Republic of Ireland
guarantee that there is no loss of service or amenity to the people of Northern Ireland. We ask
for definitive assurance on this point before the end of this Parliament. (Paragraph 12)

We are pleased to report that the Government of the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland
and the Government of Ireland signed a Memorandum of Understanding on 1 February. The
purpose of the memorandum is that the two Governments co-operate to ensure a smooth
transition to digital terrestrial television; ensure the continued widespread availability of TG4
in Northern Ireland, in line with the commitment in the Belfast Agreement; and facilitate the
widespread availability of BBC services in Ireland and of RTE services in Northern Ireland.
5.

We recommend that the Government urge Ofcom to monitor levels of production from Northern
Ireland by the BBC and Channel 4 to ensure that their targets, as public service broadcasters,
are met as speedily as is practicable and without negative impacts on the quality of production.
(Paragraph 21)

1

Ofcom is an independent regulator and its remit, set out in the Communications Act 2003,
requires it to monitor the production quotas set for public service broadcasters. This involves
an analysis of production undertaken in the Nations, including Northern Ireland.
The Committee’s recommendation is therefore one that Ofcom will wish to consider and it
would be inappropriate for Government to become involved.
6.

We strongly recommend that the Government ask the BBC seriously and urgently to consider
locating a programme commissioner permanently within Northern Ireland with the express
mandate of improving and increasing production from the Province. (Paragraph 25)

7.

We recommend that the Government seek to engage with broadcasters and producers so as
more accurately to reflect life as it is in Northern Ireland in a way that is understandable
throughout the rest of the UK. We recommend that the Government encourage the BBC and
Channel 4 to use programmes made within the province for UK-wide broadcasting to address
the lack of portrayal and to help ensure the people throughout the rest of the UK have a clearer
perception of Northern Ireland – its people, its geography and wildlife, history and culture; and
of its history and culture in times before “the Troubles”. (Paragraph 30)

These are recommendations for the broadcasters to consider. Within the framework of the
Communications Act and the BBC’s Charter and Agreement, the broadcasters are independent
of Government and there is no provision for Government to intervene in day-to-day operational
and editorial matters. This is important in maintaining the important principle of freedom of
expression by broadcasters.
8.

We recommend that given the strength, popularity and reach of UTV as a competitor to the BBC
in Northern Ireland at present, an IFNC should be introduced only once the lessons of the pilots
in Scotland, Wales and an English Television Broadcasting in Northern Ireland region have
been learned. We note that those three areas have been chosen for pilots because continued news
provision is under significant immediate threat in each, whereas this is not at present the case
in Northern Ireland. We therefore recommend that the Government consult with Ofcom and
broadcasters in Northern Ireland after the pilots to fully assess the suitability of INFCs within
the province, taking into account its current unique position within the UK in terms of its news
provision. (Paragraph 46)

The Government agrees with the Committee’s view and will naturally discuss when a roll
out of IFNCs to Northern Ireland can be accomplished with all interested parties including
Ofcom, broadcasters and the Northern Ireland Executive.
9.

We recommend that the Government assess the non-news based needs of Northern Ireland,
and also actively and urgently consider devolving to the Northern Ireland Assembly the
administration of funding for local, non-news programming possibly to include drama,
children’s content and current affairs in Northern Ireland. (Paragraph 50)

The Government has had to distinguish between where plurality is desirable and where it is
essential. The priority for the Government is to focus on what is essential and evidence shows
that people care most about news. For a significant, but smaller group, plural provision of
original non-news programming is also seen as important. The Government’s Digital Economy
Bill will place a new requirement for the Channel 4 Corporation (C4C) to include content for
older children and young adults in its services. We consider that adjusting C4C’s functions
in this way is a more appropriate way of securing increased provision of children’s content
without adding pressure on the public purse during this difficult economic period.
10. We recommend that, given its legal obligations under the Belfast Agreement, the UK
Government prioritise the guarantee of funding for the Irish Broadcasting Fund beyond March
2011. (Paragraph 57)
The Government has agreed that it will continue to fund the Irish Language Broadcasting
Fund, with a further £3m a year being made available for a further 4 years up to 2015.

2

11. We recommend that the Government fully assess minority language provision, particularly the
provision of Ulster Scots, in Northern Ireland and ensure that it is meeting its obligations as
stated in the Belfast Agreement and the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.
(Paragraph 60)
The Belfast Agreement committed the Government to exploring the scope for achieving
more widespread availability of TG4 in Northern Ireland and to seek more effective ways
to encourage and provide support for the Irish language film and television production in
Northern Ireland. The Government considers both these undertakings fulfilled. The erection
of a new aerial at Divis has enabled the widespread availability of TG4 throughout Northern
Ireland and the recent MoU signed with the Irish government ensures this will continue postDSO. Similarly, the establishment of the Irish Language Broadcast Fund has ensured greater
financial support for an independent Irish language production sector in Northern Ireland.
The Government is satisfied that it is meeting its obligations under the Charter, and the recent
third report of the Committee of Experts on the Charter confirmed that those undertakings in
respect of broadcasting matters at Article 11 of the Charter have been fulfilled.
12. This short inquiry has clearly demonstrated that Northern Ireland is culturally neglected by
the BBC, Channel 4 and those who commission television programmes within the UK and by
those with ministerial responsibilities in the UK Government. Concerted efforts need urgently
to be directed towards eradicating that neglect. (Paragraph 61)
The Government is satisfied that it is meeting its responsibilities. For example, as noted above,
the Government has renewed its commitment to fund the Irish Language Broadcasting Fund.
Nonetheless, the Government will bear the recommendation in mind.
13. UTV has the biggest audience share of any local news provider in the UK, demonstrating
a clear demand for output produced in Northern Ireland. Further to satisfy that demand, we
greatly welcome the emergence of a number of small independent companies within Northern
Ireland. (Paragraph 62)
The Government notes the Committee’s conclusion and considers that Government measures
intended to boost the independent production sector have supported the Committee’s findings.
For example, the Communications Act and the BBC’s Charter and Agreement include
measures intended to boost independent and regional production.
14. An independently funded news consortium pilot may not be an immediate priority, but we
repeat that the portrayal of Northern Ireland throughout the rest of the UK and beyond is poor.
It is also crucial that a fund for non-news provision, to be administered by the Northern Ireland
Assembly, should be provided by the Government. (Paragraph 63)
The Government is aware of proposals for a publicly funded independent media commission
for Northern Ireland charged with commissioning news and non-news programmes from
independent producers in Northern Ireland. The Government is not proposing to create and
centrally fund such a commission at this time. However, it is open to the Northern Ireland
Executive to fund content itself if it is considered a priority.

3

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Tel 028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401

