GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE HOUSE
OF LORDS SELECT COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS
REPORT INTO REGULATION OF TELEVISION ADVERTISING

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Culture,
Olympics Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
April 2011

Cm 8057

£6.00

© Crown copyright 2011
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
enquiries@culture.gov.uk.
This publication is also available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk
This document is also available from our website at www.culture.gov.uk.
ISBN: 9780101805728
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID: 2423343 04/11 10656 19585
Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE HOUSE
OF LORDS SELECT COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS
REPORT INTO REGULATION OF TELEVISION ADVERTISING

The Government welcomes the Select Committee’s First Report of the 2010-2011
Session.
The report presents a detailed overview of the regulation of television advertising, and
consideration of the undertakings offered by Carlton/Granada on their merger in 2003.
The report also provides a detailed assessment of many of the issues affecting the UK
television advertising market. The assessment then explores how certain issues might
be holding back parts of the sector and examines ways in which changes might be
made to address these concerns.
The Department is grateful to the Committee for its examination into the regulation of
the television advertising industry and we note its recommendations. We have
carefully considered all the recommendations made by the Committee and this
document represents our response.
Conclusions and recommendations
Recommendations 192 & 193 are directed towards Ofcom, the independent broadcast
regulator, who will be responding to the Committee directly on these points.
181. We believe that there is a strong public interest in supporting and
promoting investment in UK originated content on television. It is therefore
essential that the commercial PSBs’ revenue potential is maintained and that
revenue is reinvested in quality original UK television programmes (para 39).
We agree with the Committee’s comments on the importance in supporting and
promoting investment in UK originated content on television. We recognise that UKproduced programmes are highly valued by British viewers and, with over £2.3 billion
spent by the five main PSB channels in 2009 on first-run, UK-originated programmes
in 2009 contribute significantly to the UK economy. We also recognise the
contribution of foreign broadcasters in the UK with over £400m of original content
per annum.
182. We were encouraged by ITV plc’s desire to re-invest revenue in more
diverse programmes which were not necessarily aimed at securing the highest
rating. However, we are conscious of the pressures of commercial realities and if
the television advertising regime is to be changed, we would wish to see binding
undertakings in place. These undertakings would ensure that ITV plc invests an
appropriate proportion of any additional ITV1 advertising revenue in moving
beyond its basic contractual obligation to public service broadcasting by
developing a range of high quality UK-produced programmes. This should be
rigorously enforced by Ofcom (para 47).
3

We would welcome any increase in ITV investment in more diverse programming.
We note that the report suggests undertakings should be offered and enforced by
Ofcom. However, we recognise that ITV already has a number of obligations which
are PSB-related, requiring ITV to produce 35% of programming outside London and
25% of programming from independent producers. Therefore any extra undertakings
would need to be fully justified and balanced and we would not necessarily wish to be
unduly prescriptive. Moreover, there are potentially a number of practical problems
around introducing new undertakings, for example: how does one clearly define highquality programming in this context? How to avoid “deadweight”, ie that the
additional resources are used to make programmes that may have been made anyway?
Our belief is that ITV, as a commercial company, must be allowed a degree of
autonomy to decide how it targets its audience and invests its income to ensure it
meets its PSB obligations.
183. We do not consider a possible very slight increase in the cost of some goods
and services which are advertised on television to be a significant impediment to
any revision of the television advertising industry regulations. It is in the public’s
interest to increase investment in quality UK originated programming and this
far outweighs the contested—and marginal—detriment that might follow from
advertisers paying slightly higher prices to broadcasters (para 52).
We agree that increased investment leading to more quality UK originated
programming is in the public’s interest. However, we are not convinced by the
method of obtaining additional revenue from advertisers paying slightly higher prices
to broadcasters. These higher prices would either be passed on to consumers, or mean
that advertisers do not increase their budgets but instead cut back on their advertising.
If the effect of the changes proposed by the Committee would have a limited effect on
advertisers, it is hard to see where the resources for additional investment would come
from. Also the effect of changes to the CRR could be to reduce advertising revenue
to other broadcasters and hence reduce their ability to produce quality UK originated
programming.
184. We agree with the Competition Commission that ITV plc retains a
competitive advantage as a legacy of the 2003 merger of Carlton and Granada.
As a result we recognise that some form of regulation is necessary in order to
curb ITV’s ability to exploit its competitive advantage to the detriment of the
industry and the television watching public (para 80).
We note this recommendation.
185. We are persuaded that in the light of changes in the market for television
advertising the CRR undertakings appear to be overly detrimental to ITV plc.
They should be abolished. However, although ITV1’s competitive advantage
has reduced since 2003 as a result of the increase in the number of broadcasters
within the industry, it has not reduced to the extent that the CRR undertakings
could be abolished without the provision of alternative binding undertakings
(para 101).

4

There are a range of opinions about the CRR undertakings. On the one hand Ofcom
have stated that if CRR were relaxed and ITV took advantage of the situation, it
would probably be able to increase its revenues, but that there was no guarantee this
‘additional income’ would be used for investments and programming. The advertisers
cited in their evidence that they would be concerned about an increase in advertising
costs should CRR be removed. It was argued that this is likely to be at the expense of
other broadcasters since advertisers remain reliant on ITV1 as a means of reaching
large audiences quickly. The Committee itself recognises in recommendation 184
that there has to be a “curb” on ITV’s ability to exploit its competitive advantage. On
the other hand ITV complained that CRR has artificially suppressed its ability to gain
advertising revenue, and that this had had a highly distorting impact on the UK media
market.
We note this range of views and agree with the Competition Commission (CC) and
the Committee that a wider review of the advertising market is required. We further
note the CC says that the way in which television airtime is currently sold has a
significant influence on the need to retain CRR. We therefore welcome the
announcement by Ofcom on 17 March that it intends to undertake a review of the way
TV advertising is traded. If Ofcom find a cause for concern during the course of the
review, they may make a market investigation reference to the Competition
Commission, or they could also accept remedies in lieu of a reference. It is a highly
likely outcome of this analysis that Ofcom will pass the matter to the CC which will
carry out a more formal review of competition in TV advertising market as part of a
market investigation. In instigating this review Ofcom hope to complete their
assessment as quickly as possible.
We are conscious of the time it may take to investigate properly this very complex
market and encourage Ofcom and the CC to work closely together. The results of this
review will feed into our work on a new Communications Bill. In addition, if at any
time during this market investigation it becomes obvious that legislative changes are
required, we have asked Ofcom and the CC to notify the Department at the earliest
stage so that it can be fully taken into account in a timely fashion. However, any
formal recommendations would not become available until after the final report is
published.
186. In order to address the concerns of the non-consolidated channel 3 licensees
(STV, UTV and Channel TV) and ISBA on the bundling and withholding of ITV
plc’s advertising airtime we recommend that if CRR is removed the airtime
sales rules, recently revoked by Ofcom, be reintroduced (para 109).
We note the concerns that if CRR was removed there would be greater confusion and
complexity when determining how much revenue goes to ITV plc in comparison to
STV, UTV and Channel TV. STV also made a point that there should be sufficient
transparency to see how ITV plc represents and sells ITV1 in isolation from the other
Channel 3 licence holders.
When Ofcom lifted the Airtime Sales Rules (ASR) they said it was appropriate to do
so in the context of sector developments and CRR continuing to exist. In addition,
Ofcom said that in the event that CRR was lifted they would look again at the need to
reinstate ASR.
5

187. We welcome ITV plc’s recommitment to public service broadcasting in the
light of a possible removal of the CRR undertakings. It is essential that ITV plc
are accountable for the commitments which they made to us on increasing
investment in programming; in particular on the provision of funding for
additional quality UK originated programmes and a new focus on investing in
training (para 116).
This recommendation is difficult to comment on, since CRR remains in place, and
there is no alternative provision. However, in the event that CRR had been removed,
we would welcome ITV’s recommitment to public service broadcasting, but note
concerns that there was no obvious mechanism for ensuring ITV would spend more
on original content.
188. We recommend that ITV plc puts forward a proposal to the Competition
Commission and the Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport
for alternative undertakings to meet the Secretary of State’s approval. These
should address any competition concerns which would remain if CRR were to
be removed and include a commitment by ITV plc to invest an appropriate
proportion of any additional revenue raised following the removal of CRR in
quality UK original programming and training. The proposed undertakings
should be binding on ITV plc, and on any other future owners of the channel 3
licence. The new undertakings should be as simple as possible. ITV plc would
then be accountable to Ofcom for complying with the undertakings (para 117).
It is for ITV to consider whether to put forward proposals for alternative undertakings.
However, it should be noted that any undertakings to address competition concerns
are the responsibility of the competition authorities, not DCMS.
189. We recommend that an appeals process for handling disputes between
advertisers and commercial television broadcasters should be maintained
(para 122).
The appeals adjudicator deals with disputes over CRR, but we note the
recommendation that even if CRR was to be removed that the appeals adjudicator
should remain.
190. We recommend that binding undertakings are sought from ITV plc on the
investment in quality UK original content and training before CRR is removed
(para 125).
The government does not currently have the power to remove CRR or to set new
undertakings, but we note the recommendation.
191. We note that the Government believes that primary legislation would be
required in order to remove the CRR undertakings. However, if a means of
doing so is possible, it would be desirable to address the issue of CRR before the
next Communications Bill (para 126).
The CRR undertakings were offered by Carlton and Granada at the time of the merger
under the Fair Trading Act 1973. The OFT has a duty to keep undertakings under the
6

Fair Trading and Enterprise Acts under review; powers to vary or release the CRR
undertakings lie with the Competition Commission. Should the market change
significantly and make it appropriate to remove the undertakings, the most suitable
route would therefore be via the Competition Commission, following advice from the
OFT. In our view, the proposed review of the wider TV sales market offers the best
opportunity for the removal or modification of the CRR but if other roots are
proposed we agree that the Communications Act provides a useful vehicle.
192. We recommend that the COSTA rules should be harmonised at analogue
switch off so that all commercial television channels should be allowed to show
the same average number of advertisements in any given clock hour (para 140).
AND
193. As there is no appetite from the general public for an increase to the
quantity and frequency of television advertising, especially on PSB channels, we
recommend that a lower figure be applied across all channels. We recommend
that, subject to further detailed research by Ofcom on the impact of any changes,
the Code on Scheduling of Television Advertising should be amended
after the completion of digital switchover in 2012 so that the number of
permissible minutes of advertising is harmonised down to an average of seven
minutes per hour on average across all channels. This would ensure that the
viewer experience was not impaired by lengthy advertising breaks during and
between programmes. It is important that an appropriate peak time limit should
also be determined on the same basis following further Ofcom research (para
164).
We note your recommendations on the harmonisation of minutage, which is a matter
for Ofcom to consider. Indeed, Ofcom explained on 17 March that this was an area
where they needed to do more work before taking a decision to move away from the
status quo.
Ofcom CEO Ed Richards said any changes to advertising minutes per hour must be
rooted in a clear understanding of how the relevant public interest objectives in
Ofcom’s statutory remit should be weighed against each other – alongside more
specific analysis of different options.
194. We agree with the Competition Commission and the Office of Fair Trading
that it is time for a wholesale review into the television advertising trading
market. The Competition Commission called for a wider review of the television
advertising market as long ago as 2000 and a review is even more essential
today. A more transparent method of trading television advertising airtime is
needed and it is unfortunate that the industry has been unable to produce their
own solution. Under those circumstances we call on the Secretary of State for
Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport to initiate this review before the end of
March 2011 (para 173).
We have noted previous calls for a wholesale review into the television advertising
market. We also note that the CC has felt its review of CRR had been restricted by
the scope it can work in. We agree with the recommendation that a fuller market
7

investigation of the way advertising is traded will therefore allow the CC to take a
wider considered look at how CRR affects the market. As noted above, we are
pleased to note that Ofcom has announced it is to start this review by undertaking an
initial investigation and may then make a market investigation reference to the CC for
a more detailed investigation.
195. The television advertising industry needs a transparent trading system
which enables fairness, flexibility and certainty. We therefore recommend that a
review of the television advertising market considers the following issues:
• the efficacy of current television advertising regulations.
• how the advertising trading system might be made more open and
transparent, including the possibility of an online auction as a trading
mechanism.
• whether any best practice can be transferred from television advertising
trading systems in other countries.
• the appeals process for television advertising airtime trading to ensure
that all players in the market have a remedy if they believe they have been
unfairly treated (para 174).
As set out above, Ofcom has announced the wider review of the advertising market.
Ofcom are in the process of defining the scope of the review.
196. We do not believe Ofcom is the most appropriate body to conduct a review
of the television advertising market. Rather, we recommend that a focussed
review is conducted by a small expert panel (para 179).
As the expert regulator in this area, we believe that Ofcom does have the necessary
independence and expertise to initiate this review, and then refer to the CC as
necessary. We are assured that the Ofcom review will be quick as possible and that
the CC has made a public commitment to aim, where appropriate, to complete future
market investigations in 18 months, or more quickly if possible.
197. Despite the broad remit of this inquiry we see no reason why such a review
should be unduly protracted and we recommend that the panel be given no more
than six months to report. This is to ensure that the advertisers, broadcasters
and media agencies are not faced with a lengthy period of uncertainty while the
review is taking place. It would also ensure that any conclusions from this review
could be fed in to the policy development process around the next
Communications Act (para 180).
It has been noted that this is a very complex market. We are keen for the review to
take place in as short a time as possible. However, the underlying principle is that we
must obtain a full, proper and considered investigation into all the issues for it to be of
any value. As stated above, if it becomes clear at any stage of the review that the
government needs to act, Ofcom and the CC will approach DCMS immediately,
before any formal recommendations are published. In other words, it will not be the
case that useful outputs from the review will only become available at the very end of
the process.

8

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents
Customers can also order publications from:
TSO Ireland
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
Tel 028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401

