Department for Culture, Media and Sport

The Government’s response to
Next Gen. Transforming the UK
into the world’s leading talent hub
for the video games and visual
effects industries

CM 8226

£ 6.00

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

The Government’s response to
Next Gen. Transforming the UK
into the world’s leading talent hub
for the video games and visual
effects industries

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Culture,
Olympics, Media and Sport by Command of Her Majesty
November 2011

CM 8226

£ 6.00

© Crown copyright 2011
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
This publication is available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk and from our website
at www.official-documents.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101822626
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2463738

11/11

16836

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

3

Next Gen. Transforming the UK into the World’s leading talent hub
for the video games and visual effects companies
Government Response
1.
In July 2010 Ian Livingstone OBE, Life President of Eidos, and Alex Hope
OBE, Managing Director of Double Negative, began their independent review of
skills for the UK’s video games and visual effects (VFX) sectors. This work – carried
out with the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA)
and the sector skills councils Skillset and e-skills UK – involved the largest ever
survey of games and VFX companies as well as educators, parents and children.
The resulting analysis and action plan, “Next Gen”, was published in February 2011
and was welcomed by Government as an important contribution to the evidence
base for the skills needs of the UK’s video games and VFX industries. This
document represents the Government’s response.
Video Games and VFX
2.
The Government’s economic policy objective is to achieve strong,
sustainable and balanced growth that is more evenly shared across the country and
between industries. Our ambition is to make the next decade the most dynamic and
entrepreneurial we have ever seen in Britain. The first phase of the Plan for Growth,
published alongside the Budget 2011, looked specifically at the digital and creative
industries and concluded these sectors have the potential to drive significant growth
in the UK.
3.
The economic and cultural value of the UK’s video games and VFX sectors
is clear and the long-term potential of their global markets present a great
opportunity for UK-based businesses. PwC suggests that the global market for
video games, for example, will grow from $56bn in 2010 to $82bn in 20151. VFX
have enjoyed strong growth and now constitute a major part of production budgets.
Their impact can be seen in the films, television and advertising we see across the
globe.
4.
Video games and VFX businesses are typically knowledge-intensive, high
value and offer high quality jobs. They are a good fit for our aims to rebalance the
economy. The UK games industry has an excellent reputation for creativity and
innovation. Our talent has produced ground-breaking games titles such as Little
Big Planet, Moshi Monsters and Batman: Arkham Asylum and some great
advances in video games technology have come out of the UK. This includes
recently, for example, a core part of the Xbox 360 Kinect’s human motion capture
capability which was developed by engineers at Microsoft Research in Cambridge.
Likewise in the VFX sector the UK leads the way. Some of the most important
studios in the world are based here and their success has earned the UK recent
1

PwC Global Entertainment and Media Outlook: 2011-2015

4

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Oscar wins for Inception and The Golden Compass.
5.
We are acutely aware that skills development is a crucial issue for the
sectors if we are to build on their reputation and exploit the growing market
opportunities. Next Gen sets out some compelling ideas for how the UK can be
transformed into a world leader in video games and VFX.
6.
Government also recognises that the key themes of Next Gen resonate far
beyond video games and VFX : many of the skills demanded by employers are
equally desired in the much wider economy, from business software, telecoms and
social media to financial services, fighting cyber-crime and designing the next
advances in aviation. By ensuring the UK has a strong supply of the skills
described in Next Gen we will be better able to realise the full potential of these
industries.
Industry follow-up to Next Gen
7.
The Government welcomes the industry’s creation of a Steering Committee
which is meeting regularly to respond to the report’s recommendations. It is notable
that the majority of the proposed actions are for industry itself to take forward with
educators. The Government hopes that it can help facilitate this by ensuring that the
policy environment is without barriers to the success of the UK’s VFX and video
games industries, starting with the provision of skills. We look forward to continuing
to work with industry to this end.
STEM skills
8.
We note that the industry has additionally created a Next Gen Skills coalition
bringing together a wider group of businesses to pursue a shared agenda on skills
for the digital economy. This step is a testament to the way in which the Next Gen
report has helped to demonstrate the importance of ICT, Science, Technology
Engineering and Maths (STEM) subjects and computer science to the wider
business community.
9.
The Government has always recognised, and continues to recognise, the
importance of STEM subjects in supporting a broad spread of digital, creative, high
tech, manufacturing and other industries as well as their fundamental importance as
part of a child’s core education. Similarly, the Government appreciates the value of
computer science and the important contribution the knowledge underpinning this
subject makes to supporting economically important sectors of the economy such
as video games and VFX. The Government looks forward to working with Next Gen
Skills, educators and others to develop an attractive computer science offering for
schools, so that students are able to develop the rigorous skills needed – not only
to support these industries but also to ensure a digitally literate citizenry.
10.
Stimulating demand is central to the Next Gen’s recommendations:
encouraging young people to pursue a career in video games and VFX, by
engaging them and advising them on the skills needed to pursue these careers.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

5

Industry is already acting on the report’s suggestions in this regard – for example by
launching the new Video Games Ambassadors scheme with STEMNET, providing
a route for industry professionals to go into schools and encourage young people to
study science subjects.
Government Policy
11.
Next Gen listed 20 recommendations for action. Our specific response to
each of these is as follows:
Recommendation 1: Bring computer science into the National Curriculum as
an essential discipline.
12.
As outlined within the Next Gen report, ICT is currently part of the National
Curriculum at all four key stages (ages 5 – 16) and allows for the teaching of some
of the skills associated with computer science. However, the Government
recognises that learning the skills to use ICT effectively and acquiring the
knowledge of the underpinning computer science are two different (albeit
complementary) subjects. Furthermore, the Government recognises that the current
ICT programme is insufficiently rigorous and in need of reform.
13.
The Government is committed to introducing a slimmed down, more focused,
and more rigorous curriculum. As part of this commitment, a review of the National
Curriculum was launched on 20 January 2011. The review aims to develop a new
National Curriculum which clearly sets out the core knowledge that all children
should acquire, while giving teachers more freedom to decide how to teach and
design a wider school curriculum that best meets the needs of their pupils.
14.
Department for Education Ministers announced at the outset of the National
Curriculum review that English, maths, science and physical education would
remain as subjects within the National Curriculum in all four school Key Stages.
They are currently considering the place of all the other subjects that currently
feature within the National Curriculum, including ICT, and will bring forward
proposals shortly. If ICT were to be included as a discrete subject within the new
National Curriculum, then work on a new Programme of Study would begin next
year. As part of that process the review will consider the teaching of computer
science within ICT. The Government recognises that, in the event of ICT not
remaining part of the National Curriculum, attention would still need to be given to
ensure children could acquire computer science skills. The Government would work
with the sector to find the best way to achieve this.
15.
The Government recognises that the IT GCSE is in need of reform, and will
be looking at ways to improve the course. The Government welcomes e-skills UK’s
“Behind the Screens” project which aims to trial a possible reformed IT GCSE
curriculum. e-Skills UK are aiming to establish a new way of delivering IT in
secondary schools, initially concentrating around Key Stage 4 and bringing in
employers to provide a bank of resources as stimulus materials for the projects.

6

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

The Government supports the alignment of industry interest in computing
curriculum around this pilot activity.
16.
In addition to the curriculum review and the pilot IT GCSE the Government
recognises the potential developments such as the Raspberry Pi computer project
have for stimulating and motivating children to understand basic computer science
in schools. Much as the BBC Micro inspired a generation of computer programmers
in the early 1980’s the Raspberry Pi could provide the platform for teachers and
pupils to gain hands on programming experience. Raspberry Pi is an example of
how games developers are finding innovative and affordable solutions to tackle the
perceived issues highlighted in the Next Gen Report.
Recommendation 2: Sign up the best teachers to teach computer science
through Initial Teacher Training bursaries and ‘Golden Hellos’.
17.
The Government recognises the need for more high quality computer
science teaching and will, over the next few months, be looking at the best ways to
achieve this.
Recommendation 3: Use video games and visual effects at school to draw
greater numbers of young people into STEM and computer science.
18.
We believe that teachers are best placed to decide how to teach and what
resources to use. However, more could be done to make teachers aware of the
different resources available, and to encourage their use. In his speech at the Royal
Society on 29 June, the Secretary of State for Education said that “we need to look
at the way the very technological innovations we are racing to keep up with can
help us along the way”. He paid tribute to innovations such as iTunesU and the
Khan Academy that are putting high quality lessons on the web, and computer
games developed by Marcus Du Sautoy that are enabling children to engage with
complex mathematical problems. The Department for Education is keen to engage
with the sector to develop ways of encouraging the use of these, and other, exciting
innovations.
19.
The Department for Education is also working with the Li Ka Shing
Foundation and the Stanford Research Institute on a pilot programme to use
computer programmes to teach mathematics. Stanford say it is one of the most
successful educational projects they have seen.
20.
e-skills UK have made progress through Computer Clubs for Girls (CC4G)
which has engaged 135,000 girls in 3,800 schools, bringing IT to life in a context to
which girls can readily relate. CC4G could be further enhanced by developing a
partnership with the video games industry which would introduce girls to the
principles of video games, and the exciting potential of a career in the industry
through fun activities and offline learning challenges.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

7

Recommendation 4: Set up a one-stop online repository and community site
for teachers for video games and visual effects educational resources.
21.
Government welcomes industry’s commitment, through the Next Gen Skills
Steering Group, to look at delivering an appropriate web resource for teachers and
students, providing educational resources and careers advice to those wishing to
pursue a career in the video games and VFX industries. This would undoubtedly be
of value.
Recommendation 5: Include art and computer science in the English
Baccalaureate.
22.
The English Baccalaureate is designed to recognise the achievement of
students in a core of academic subjects. The “omission” of art and ICT from the
suite of subjects within the English Baccalaureate does not mean the Government
views either subject as unimportant. The Government expects all students to study
subjects which are outside the English Baccalaureate; and fully recognises the
value that such study will bring. The coverage of the English Baccalaureate has
been kept small enough to ensure that other subjects can be studied alongside it.
23.
The English Baccalaureate will be only one measure of performance, and
should not be the limit of schools’ ambitions for their pupils. Schools will retain the
freedom to innovate and offer the GCSEs, iGCSEs and other qualifications which
best meet the needs of their pupils.
24.
Pupils will also be able to achieve vocational qualifications alongside the
English Baccalaureate. With the proper structures in place through the reform of the
National Curriculum, the introduction of the English Baccalaureate and changes to
school performance tables to focus on the most valuable vocational qualifications,
schools will have the freedom and the incentives to provide a rigorous and broad
education for all.
25.
The Department for Education will monitor the progress of the English
Baccalaureate. The Department does not rule out entirely the future inclusion of
other GCSEs in the EBacc, should they be of sufficiently high standard and form
part of a core education.
Recommendation 6: Encourage art-tech crossover and work-based learning
through school clubs.
26.
The Department for Education already helps to support a network of afterschool STEM Clubs in England and there are around 2,000 such clubs across the
UK. STEM Clubs allow young people to explore, investigate and discover STEM
subjects in a stimulating learning environment, away from the constraints of the
school timetable or a prescribed curriculum. They allow pupils and their club
leaders to work together and explore many different ideas and activities. They can
motivate and build confidence in young people who struggle with STEM subjects,

8

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

and provide an extra outlet for pupils who already show aptitude and are interested
in furthering their learning. They can encourage a crossover between art and
technology but the focus of clubs varies according to locally determined priorities.
27.
It is clear that STEM club activity is already supporting extra-curricular
engagement with a broad range of activities associated with computer science.
Whilst schools are free to do what they want in their clubs, advice is structured
enabling them to diversify and make cross curricular links, particularly with nonSTEM subjects such as the arts. Examples include animation techniques, graphics
and image editing.
28.
Since the inception of the network, many clubs have included computer
science related activities in their portfolio. In particular, there are a number of
schools using different forms of logic control such as PICAXE and several have
taken this a step further to investigate different applications of robotics.
29.
Several clubs have taken part in the recent STEM Challenges, inspired by
London 2012 and managed by STEMNET. One particular challenge was to design
a mobile phone app for London 2012 and another asked pupils to build a website
for Rachel Morris, ahead of her competing in 2012. Students had to think about
end-user experiences, graphics and functionality for each.
30.
However, the Department for Education is keen to encourage even more
such clubs and looks forward to working with the sector to develop ways of
achieving this.
Recommendation 7: Build a network of STEMNET and Teach First video
games and visual effects Ambassadors.
31.
The Government fully endorses this recommendation as highlighted in the
Plan for Growth. The effective follow up of this can make an important contribution
to the aim of improving the supply of STEM graduates. The VFX and video games
sectors are engaging with the STEM Ambassadors programme. Government
welcomes this development and would encourage further engagement with
STEMNET from businesses and individuals across the sector.
32.
Since the launch of Next Gen there has been a strong response. When the
review was published in February 2011, there were 38 STEM Ambassadors stating
they had worked or were working in the video games sector and just one in the VFX
sector. There are now 70 STEM Ambassadors from the video games and VFX
sectors.
33.
STEMNET has achieved this by close collaboration with both the video
games and VFX sectors. On VFX this has included working with companies such
as Double Negative, Framestore and The Mill to recruit STEM Ambassadors and
support them in making links and volunteering with local schools. There are now 27

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

9

STEM Ambassadors registered from the VFX sector and more are expected to join
the Programme over the coming months.
34.
STEMNET now has a partnership agreement in place with the UK trade
association for Interactive Entertainment (UKIE) which supports their Video Games
Ambassadors scheme (a sub set of the STEM Ambassadors Programme). There
are now 25 STEM Ambassadors who are part of this scheme (some of which were
STEM Ambassadors before the review was published) and in total 43 STEM
Ambassadors now state that they are working or have worked in the video games
sector.
35.
The report also highlights the role the UK's VFX and video games industry
professionals have in supporting Teach First participants as coaches. The coaching
initiative comprises an aspect of the two-year Leadership Development
Programme, which all participants undertake in schools facing challenging
circumstances. It is part of the offer to those corporates, trusts and foundations,
which provide both funding and in kind support to Teach First. The charity Teach
First will therefore look to explore brokering new relationships with organisations in
the VFX and video games sectors who may be interested in becoming official
supporters.
Recommendation 8: Introduce a new National Video Games Development and
Animation Schools Competition
36.
The Government welcomes schools competitions as an important way of
inspiring young people. The Department for Education is already committed to
introducing two new engineering prizes, as set out in the White Paper, “The
Importance of Teaching”, published in November 2010.
37.
We are pleased to see there are already a number of industry-sponsored
initiatives in this area. For example, the BAFTA National Young Games Designers
Competition, sponsored by BAFTA, NESTA, EA and Dare to be Digital at Abertay
University. NESTA is also sponsoring the Animation 12 competition. It will report
back to government and industry with evaluation data on the effectiveness of these
competitions.
38.
Likewise, The British Informatics Olympiad, sponsored by Lionhead Studios,
an annual competition in computer programming for secondary schools and sixth
form colleges continues to challenge students offering them opportunity to
represent their country at the International Informatics Olympiad.
39.
Bournemouth University is organising a new VFX competition supported by
Skillset and UK Screen. This will develop into an annual event hosted by the
National Centre for Computer Animation (NCCA) that celebrates maths, science
and art as the core VFX and Animation skill set.

10

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Recommendation 9: Design and implement a Next Generation Video Games
and Visual Effects Talent Careers Strategy.
40.
We want to continue to use technology to improve careers guidance services
for young people, to help them tackle the barriers they face to progress in work and
learning. We are working to align young people’s online provision with the adult
provision as the National Careers Service develops.
41.
We do not however believe that central provision and promotion of specialist
websites is an effective use of public funds and we have adhered to the Varney
Report's recommendations to reduce the overall number of government websites
and to provide citizens with a single point of information and online transactions
through Directgov.
42.
Schools will be placed under a duty from September 2012 (subject to the
passage of the Education Bill) to secure independent, impartial careers guidance
for their pupils and will be free to make decisions about the kind of support that
meets the needs of their pupils, engaging as appropriate in partnership with
external, expert providers.
43.
All the international evidence is clear that, in order to raise standards, we
need to trust head teachers and teachers to make decisions in the interests of their
pupils. They know their pupils best and are best placed to decide what form of
careers guidance is most appropriate for them.
44.
The Government will not prescribe what schools should do. As part of
providing independent, impartial advice about options, schools may choose to bring
in external careers professionals either for particular pupils or at particular stages,
but this should be for the school to decide. We will trust schools to make a
professional judgement of how best to meet their duty, including determining the
balance between web-based and telephone services and face-to-face support.
Recommendation 10: Provide online careers-related resources for teachers,
careers advisers and young people.
45.
The Government welcomes the industry’s engagement with this
recommendation and encourage further partnering to take this forward. For
example, working with STEMNET to share new resources produced for schools by
the video games and VFX sectors with teachers to increase awareness and use of
these resources in schools.
46.
There are already many excellent sector specific careers portals with useful
information which can be easily accessed through the internet. e-skills UK’s
BigAmbition website for example features a variety of video games content which
gives students a full and realistic picture of what it is like to work in the industry.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

11

BigAmbition has over 7000 registered users and 300 registered teachers who can
access over 240 hours of online teaching resources for 14-19 learners, mapped to
a range of Key Stage 4 and 5 qualifications, plus accompanying downloadable
support material.
47.
The Government looks to industry to work with careers advisers and
teachers to help young people make the best use of these resources but are not
convinced that further resources are needed.
Recommendation 11: Develop kite marking schemes, building on Skillset
accreditation, which allow the best specialist HE courses to differentiate
themselves from less industry-relevant courses.
48.
The Government agrees that graduates are more likely to be equipped with
the skills that employers want if there is genuine collaboration between institutions
and employers in the design and delivery of courses. All institutions should be
involved in some form of collaborative partnership with employers. The Government
has asked Professor Tim Wilson, until recently the Vice Chancellor of the University
of Hertfordshire, to look into how the benefits of joint working between business and
higher education (HE) can be maximised in support of the enhancement of
graduates’ employability. His response is expected early in 2012.
49.
The Government are encouraging universities to work even more closely
with employers to co-design, accredit or “kite mark” courses. It has been shown
that kite marking of courses, where schemes have benefitted from real
backing from industry, can lead to much better employability outcomes
for graduates – this is a win-win for both employers and graduates, and helps
promote universities' understanding of exactly what employers are looking for in all
future recruits.
50.
We recognise the success of the Skillset programme for accrediting
computer games courses, whose students were almost three times more likely to
be employed in this sector than graduates from other computer games courses.
Given the value of this data to potential students, it would be interesting to know the
destination of all the students involved to see where these industry valued skills
have taken them. Abertay University is continuing to collect and review data which
can support any future metrics used to support kite-marking and we look forward to
seeing the results of this analysis.
51.
Skillset have also received funds from the Growth and Innovation Fund and
Employer Investment Fund that are enabling them to pilot 'Extending the Tick'
extending their accreditation and benchmarking work to benefit the wider ‘feeder’
courses for the industry. It also allows them to look at addressing Further Education
(FE) courses as ‘feeders’ for HE .
52.

Skillset has also received other Employer Investment Funds to address key

12

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

skills issues across the Creative industries enabling them to prepare co-investment
bids for the new Growth and Innovation Fund on behalf of the VFX and Computer
Games sectors.
53.
e-skills UK will be developing a kite marking scheme for software
development degrees, and already have in place a software development
apprenticeship. Both of these will improve the pipeline of software engineering
talent into the gaming environment.
Recommendation 12: The Higher Education Funding Council England
(HEFCE) should include industry-accredited specialist courses in their list of
‘Strategically Important and Vulnerable’ subjects (SIVs) that merit targeted
funding. Industry commits to these courses through industrial scholarships
and support for CPD for lecturers.
54.
In the new funding system from August 2012, those subjects which are the
most expensive to teach (such as medicine, science and engineering) will remain a
priority for HEFCE funding. In addition, through the grant letter to HEFCE and more
recently through the White Paper, The Department for Business, Innovation and
Skills (BIS) has charged HEFCE with identifying those subjects which may be
strategically important and vulnerable in the future, and with determining what
further support is required for such subjects to avoid undesirable reductions in the
scale of provision. HEFCE’s concern will be to identify the minority of areas in which
there is robust evidence that the public interest in relation to subject provision may
not be achieved through the student-led funding system alone. Industry
accreditation of courses will not provide evidence that a subject area is vulnerable.
It will however, be an important part of the information provided to inform student
choice in the new funding system, and will be included in the Key Information Set.
55.
HEFCE is running a two stage consultation on the arrangements for teaching
funding for 2012-13 and beyond. The first stage of this consultation, which closed
at the start of September 2011, outlined broad plans for supporting high-cost
subjects and for developing a new approach to SIVS. A subsequent consultation
early in 2012 will cover the funding arrangements for 2013-14 and beyond. Against
this background, HEFCE has already begun discussions with key umbrella
stakeholders about the future risks to subject provision, and how these could be
monitored and addressed, with a view to determining a future approach to SIVS.
HEFCE’s Chief Executive has already met with Skillset to discuss course
accreditation. HEFCE would welcome further dialogue with Skillset regarding the
future risks in this area of provision.
56.
However, as previously stated, the Government welcomes industry’s
endeavours in promoting the types of provision they want and support. What we would
like is much more contact between employers and the HE sector to ensure skill needs
are addressed. We are already seeing great examples of the large employers such as
Blitz Games, BabyCow and IBM, backing specific courses or direct engagement
through academy sponsorship, internship programmes and apprenticeships.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

13

Recommendation 13: Raise awareness of the video games and visual effects
industries in the eyes of STEM and arts graduates.
57.
Schemes such as the STEMNET ambassador programme provide a direct
link between industry and education, exposing learners to industry and vice versa.
Likewise, greater collaboration between industry and universities will raise
awareness amongst under graduates and those aspiring to continue their learning
about opportunities the digital and creative industries provide.
58.
Greater awareness will come from encouraging further collaboration
between industry and universities in the courses provided and the information
available. Encouraging greater and closer collaboration will align the supply with
the demand as demonstrated by the Information Technology Management for
Business (ITMB) degree. ITMB ensures students graduate with a mixture of
technical, business, and interpersonal skills that are valued by employers.
59.
ITMB is a sector-supported honours degree programme developed in
response to demand from employers for IT graduates with both a solid grasp of
technology and the business-related and interpersonal skills to work effectively in
project teams and client-facing roles. Employers collaborated with universities to
develop a curriculum based on equal contribution of technical, business, project
and interpersonal skills content.
60.
The ITMB degree is supported by over 60 employers and is being delivered
to over 850 students in 14 universities in England and Wales. 32% of students on
the degree are female – more than double the proportion of female applicants to all
IT-related degree courses and in a recent survey 90% of ITMB students were
reported as feeling that they are either 'well prepared' for employment or already
'work ready'.
Recommendation 14: Give prospective university applicants access to
meaningful information about employment prospects for different courses
61.
Linked to recommendations 9, 10 and 17, the Government welcomes
proposals to provide clarity of information for those wishing to pursue a career in
the games and VFX industries and would encourage employers and universities to
work closely to achieve this.
62.
The HE White Paper announced plans for each university to provide a
standard set of comparable information items for each course, on university
websites, by September 2012. This is known as the Key Information Set (KIS). The
Key Information Set will provide comparable information, at course level, on student
satisfaction levels, progression rates, employment prospects and salaries.
63.
All accredited universities offering video games courses are members of
UKIE. Employers on the UK Screen and the Skillset Computer Games Skills

14

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Council are also working with Skillset to enhance and expand the accreditation
process to more courses and universities.
64.
Another trade body for games, Tiga, highlights information about video game
courses in its publication on careers in the video games industry and on the Tiga
website, in order to give students meaningful information about courses in general.
Tiga hope to gather valid employment data on graduates from relevant university
courses and publish it in the future.
65.
Tiga will also be introducing a new service connecting university and
colleges with guest lecturers from the UK games industry. The pool of industry
practitioners will intensify industry-academia links, promote knowledge transfer and
enhance the quality of higher education provision, ultimately benefiting students
and the wider games industry. Some universities and colleges do not currently have
strong connections with the games industry. This new service will help to address
this problem.
Recommendation 15: Develop a template for introducing workplace
simulation into industry-accredited video games and visual effects courses,
based on Abertay University’s Dare to be Digital competition.
66.
Government welcomes this recommendation and recognises the activity
already in evidence, particularly with regards to Abertay University and the Dare to
be Digital competition.
67.
NESTA has supported Swedish Digital Media trainer Hyper Island
http://www.hyperisland.se/ to import their new entrant training programme to the
UK. The programme launched in Manchester in May, enrolling 16 British students
aged between 18-25. NESTA is keen to understand how the programme may
provide lessons for Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) to understand the potential
for industry-led education.
68.
Staff from Abertay University’s Business Support team are engaging in
outreach activities to promote workplace simulation through the Dare to be Digital
model and using graduates placed on prototype grant funded projects. This
includes the provision of prototype funding for universities to work with SMEs
across UK to establish real world work opportunities. A particular feature of the
prototype fund is the development of a graduate Talent Pool for those seeking real
world work experience on the prototype fund, thus increasing the availability of
industry relevant work experience
Recommendation 16: Leading universities and Further Education (FE)
colleges sponsor a high-tech creative industries University Technical College
(UTC), with clear progression routes into HE.
69.

We welcome Next Gen’s acknowledgement of the importance of UTCs. The

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

15

Department for Education plans to establish at least 24 UTCs by 2014. UTCs have
a 14-19 age range and are sponsored by local University and industry partners.
As the Government response to Alison Wolf’s review into vocational education
made clear, they are an important part of how we are reforming the schools
system. Their unique partnership between university and industry will give young
people the opportunity to develop technical expertise that will set them in good
stead for their future careers and deliver the skills that our employers need.
70.
The Government encourages an application by industry to establish a hightech-creative-industries UTC in the next round of UTC applications. UKIE is
advising Hackney UTC on the development of their digital media curriculum. As
Next Gen Skills continues to make progress UKIE will ensure any activity it
undertakes with the UTC is joined up with the wider skills coalition and activity.
Recommendation 17: Kite mark FE courses that offer students the best
foundation in skills and knowledge to progress into Higher Education.
71.
BIS is seeking closer employment engagement with the FE sector across a
range of issues and this would fit into this pattern. It is essential learners know the
value of the course they are undertaking and engagement by employers, learned
societies or sector bodies, who are aware of the best opportunities for them to
achieve success, are a key component. As FE institutions can’t award their own
qualification it will be for employers and their representative bodies to engage with
the relevant ‘awarding bodies’ to take this approach forward.
72.
The FE STEM Data report has mapped the availability of courses in STEM
subjects across colleges and we would be delighted for employer bodies to engage
and make use of this material to promote excellence in their sector.
73.
Tiga publishes information about its FE college members on the Tiga
website and in relevant press releases, in part to provide useful information to
prospective students.
Recommendation 18: Skillset Creative Media Academies and e-skills UK’s
National Skills Academy for IT to work with industry to develop specialist
CPD training for video games and visual effects industries.
74.
The Government welcomes proposals for Skillset and the National Skills
Academy for IT to work with Industry to develop Continuing Professional
Development (CPD) training for video games and VFX sectors. The Skills Academy
has strong backing from IT employers and is well placed to engage with them.
75.
Any new areas of work would need to fit with existing commitments in its 3
year business plan, agreed with the Skills Funding Agency.

16

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Recommendation 19: Support better research-oriented university-industry
collaborations in video games and visual effects.
76.
The Government welcomes the connection between the video games and
VFX industries and universities and hopes they can work positively together within
the agreed remit of the Technology Strategy Board (TSB) business plan. The TSB
is committed through its digital team, which covers the creative industries, to
assisting in increasing the collaboration between technology teams of all kinds and
creative industries companies including video games and visual effects businesses.
The TSB’s remit is to encourage the commercialisation of technology and as such
is already wedded to the same vision that the Next Gen report has portrayed. The
TSB continues to work with academic and other research partners to strengthen the
transfer of knowledge into the commercial world.
77.
Providing the funding for collaborative R&D projects, feasibility studies, and
large scale consortium projects will continue to be part of the TSB remit. The
organisation is committed to strengthening technical knowledge and creativity in the
creative industries and increasingly to seeing that value applied across many other
areas of the economy.
78.
Over the last four years, of all the creative industries projects funded by the
TSB some 40 (21%) have been games-related, equalling over £3m in collaborative
R&D grants and fast track feasibility studies.
79.
Collaboration with IC Tomorrow and the TSB to produce the Future Games
Contest using the prototype fund – means that graduates will work on “gamification”
projects with the TSB’s digital test bed project.
Recommendation 20: Continue to treat the 18 visual effects occupations on
the Government’s shortage list as shortage occupations.
80.
The Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) provides expert independent
advice to Government on migration issues, including the regular review of the
shortage occupation list (SOL) to ensure it is up to date and reflects current labour
market needs.
81.
There is one main SOL covering the whole of the UK and a supplementary
list of additional shortage occupations in Scotland. The lists include jobs which the
MAC has identified as suffering from labour shortages and that it is sensible to (a
least partly) address those shortages through migration. All jobs are graduate level
or above. Inclusion on the SOL means that an employer wishing to sponsor a nonEEA migrant through Tier 2 does not need to carry out a Resident Labour Market
Test as by definition there will be no displacement of UK labour. In addition, if the
Tier 2 limit were over-subscribed, jobs on the SOL would be given priority.
Employers can still sponsor Tier 2 migrants for jobs which are not in the SOL,

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

17

provided they first carry out a Resident Labour Market Test and the job is in a
graduate occupation.
82.
The MAC has recently performed a review of the entire SOL and, in line with
evidence from the VFX and video games sectors, recommended that the following
job titles within visual effects and 2D/3D computer animation for film, television or
video games be retained on the shortage occupation list; animator; compositing
artist; computer graphics supervisor; matte painter; modeller; producer; production
manager; rigger; systems engineer; technical director; texture artist; and visual
effects supervisor.
83.
The report also recommended that the following job titles within visual effects
and 2D/3D computer animation for film, television and video games be included on
the shortage occupation list: 2D supervisor; 3D supervisor; software developer;
shader writer and stereo artist.
84.
Finally, they recommended that the following job titles be removed from the
shortage occupation list; animation supervisor; editor; R&D tools; R&D software;
rigging supervisor and software engineer.
85.
The Government has accepted the MAC’s recommendations and the revised
list came into force on 14 November 2011.

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

