Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Football Governance: Response to
the Culture, Media and Sport
Committee Inquiry (HC792-1)

CM8207

£6.00

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Football Governance: Response to
the Culture, Media and Sport
Committee Inquiry (HC792-1)

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Culture,
Olympics, Media and Sport by Command of Her Majesty
October 2011

CM8207

£6.00

© Crown Copyright 2011
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence,
visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this document should be sent to us at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
This publication is available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk
This document is also available from our website at www.culture.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101820721
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2458826
10/11
15427
19585
Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

1 Introduction
1. The Government is grateful to the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee
for carrying out its Inquiry into football governance and for publishing the
results on 29 July 2011.
2. The Inquiry marks a significant moment in the history of Parliament’s interest in
the important issues surrounding football governance and an important step in
improving the governance of our national game.
3. The Government believes that the Committee’s conclusions and
recommendations provide a practical and welcome way forward for the football
authorities, working closely together in the game’s long-term interests, to make
a lasting and fundamental change to the way that football is run.
4. Football in this country is unrecognisable from the position of two decades ago
– better teams, safer and more family-friendly stadia, and growing success
against racism and discrimination. Yet it has also changed into a multi-billion
pound business whilst the corporate governance structures still look like they
belong to another era.
5. The Select Committee’s report highlights the inability of the football authorities
to respond to new challenges quickly enough and the strong perception that
they are unable to agree and deliver a common vision for the long-term health
of the game. The welcome global popularity of the English game has posed
challenges which the existing structures do not yet appear to be equipped to
respond to effectively.
6. At the same time, supporters’ expectations are at an all-time high, both in
terms of their club and national team success but also their links and
involvement with the club.
7. This is not a question of apportioning blame or seeking scapegoats. There is
too much to celebrate in our game and too much at stake to fall into that trap.
Simply, we urge the football authorities to now join together to respond to the
recommendations laid down in the Select Committee’s report.
8. This is an opportunity for football to come together and prove that it can
respond to and address this challenge.

3

4

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

2 Government’s response to the conclusions
and recommendations
9. In this section the Government sets out its response to the conclusions and
recommendations in the Select Committee report. In referencing those areas,
we use the paragraph numbers as summarised in the section ‘Conclusions and
Recommendations’ in Chapter 8 of the Committee report. In the interests of
brevity we have combined the headings in some areas.
10. The Government notes that a significant majority of the conclusions and
recommendations are directed towards the football authorities, rather than
explicitly towards Government. Whilst Government does not have the formal
responsibility for addressing those areas, at the same time the Government
believes that wherever appropriate it is right to give its view on all the
Committee’s conclusions and recommendations.

Reform of the FA Board (paragraphs 52-56)
11. The Government strongly welcomes the Football Association’s decision to add
two independent non-executive members to the FA Board, which was ratified
by its Shareholders on 24 August 2011.
12. This is a good start, but the Government agrees with the Committee’s
recommendation that there needs to be further change in the overall
composition of the Board to allow it to function as effectively as possible. The
Government recognises the strong views put forward by all parties on this
issue, but believes that the recommendation for a Board of no more than ten,
with Chairman, General Secretary, two further FA executives that bring wider
football expertise, two independent non-executives and two each from the
professional and national game offers a potential way forward.
13. The Government believes that moving to a thoroughly strategic, accountable
and representative Board with the right mix of world-class skills, experience
and abilities is the key to unlocking the long-term potential of football in this
country, from grassroots right up to the national teams. It is fundamental to get
the right balance between professional, national, independent non-executives
and FA executive representatives.
14. We recognise the strong economic arguments in favour of the removal of the
current automatic 50:50 split between the national and professional game. The
issue of how best to divide any surplus revenues is one for the reconstructed
FA Board.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Reform of the FA Council and Other Committee Reforms
(paragraphs 61-63 and 65)
15. We recognise and support the strong recommendations on the reform of the
FA Council; changes to tenure and the format of meetings; removing overlap
with the Shareholders; and ensuring that it is a body which is genuinely
representative of the modern game. The principle that all FA Committees
should report to the Board rather than the Council is one that has attracted
strong backing and which the Government supports.
16. We recognise the obvious symmetry in the Football League and Premier
League adopting similar tenure limits to those suggested to the FA Council and
Government urges them to consider seriously introducing such changes. It is
for the football authorities to agree on the appropriate lengths, but we would
support proposals of two terms of three or four years each.

Debt in the game and What is causing the debt problem?
(paragraphs 73 and 79)
17. We recognise the considerable amount of evidence considered by the
Committee on the level and sustainability of debt within the Premier League
and Football League. The Government shares the concern expressed by the
Committee at the extent of losses and the number of clubs on the edge of
viability.
18. Debt per se is not always a bad thing, but it must be genuinely sustainable and
should be assessed as a percentage of turnover. Government believes that
there is a legitimate role for the national governing body, working hand in hand
with competition organisers, to ensure that appropriate and consistent checks
and balances are in place to protect the overall financial integrity of the national
game and its long-term viability. The recent moves by the Football League to
work towards a break-even rule in the Championship are a welcome indication
of the appetite amongst many clubs for a change.

Players and agents (paragraph 90)
19. The Government understands the strong feeling about the way that some
agents appear to operate and the potential consequences for conflicts of
interest and transfer fee and salary inflation. We support the Committee’s
recommendation that the Football Association should continue to press FIFA to
provide an international solution.

5

6

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

The Football Creditors Rule (paragraph 107)
20. The Government recognises the very strong views presented to the Committee
on the principle and operation of the package of football regulations and rules
which have come to be known as the ‘football creditors rule’. We have
sympathy for those who described the consequences of the rule as ‘morally
indefensible’. We understand and acknowledge the strong desire of the football
authorities to protect the integrity of their competitions. At the same time, it
should not be beyond the skill and financial resources of the professional game
to find a solution that protects the integrity of the competition, incentivises
financial prudence and due diligence, and offers equal protection to all
unsecured creditors in any future insolvency event. The Government
recognises the legal issues under consideration, in particular the current legal
challenge being brought by HMRC against the Football League. Nevertheless
we commit to work with the football authorities to support their efforts to find an
appropriate and modern solution to this issue.

Broadcasting rights (paragraph 113)
21. The Government recognises that the current model of funding football is
heavily dependent on the way that broadcasting rights are packaged and sold.
The Court of Justice of the European Union provided judgment on a number of
legal issues, including territorial selling, on 4 October 2011 in what is known as
the QC Leisure case. This judgment will be referred to the High Court who will
apply it to the specific circumstances of the case.

Parachute payments (paragraph 127)
22. The Government supports the principle of financial solidarity between
competition organisers, to ensure that the step between the Premier League
and Football League can be negotiated as sustainably as possible. We agree
with the Committee’s recommendation that there is a role for the sport’s
national governing body in such discussions in the future. We believe that as
the national governing body the relative health of aspiring clubs in both
Leagues is a legitimate concern of the Football Association. It is not for the
Football Association to determine the detail, but as a responsible governing
body, there is a role for them in helping to frame the discussion.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

The impact of UEFA (paragraphs 141 and 142)
23. The Government agrees with those who provided evidence to the Committee
that the UEFA rules on financial fair play hold out the promise of either directly
or indirectly supporting more prudent spending patterns within the Leagues.
The new approach is a welcome and significant step forward. At the same time
we support the Committee’s hope that the operation of new financial fair play
regulations will not prevent the ambitious owners of smaller clubs having the
flexibility to invest in areas such as infrastructure and youth development for
success.

A licensing model for England and Administering the
domestic licensing model (paragraphs 150, 151 and 160)
24. The Government recognises the considerable body of evidence heard and
seen by the Committee about the need for consistent, appropriate and effective
rules and regulations. Whilst the tightening of some financial regulations by the
Leagues in recent years has been welcome, the Government believes that the
Committee’s recommendation about the introduction of a licensing model will
be an important step in rebuilding confidence.
25. We agree with the Committee that the licensing model should be imposed
consistently throughout English football to underpin the self-regulation already
introduced by the Leagues. The licence should cover all competitions and all
leagues. The Government is clear that it does not expect that the Football
League or Premier League rulebooks will be superseded. The day-to-day detail
and administration of those rulebooks should remain with the Leagues, but
within the framework of the licence provided through the Football Association.
26. We agree with the Committee that it is crucial that the licensing model should
be both backwards and forwards looking, and that the Football Association
should take the primary responsibility for establishing this system as well as a
strong scrutiny and oversight role.
27. The Committee have not made a recommendation on whether an existing or
new body within the Football Association should be set up to perform this
oversight, review and horizon-scanning role. Whilst it is for the football
authorities themselves to agree the form of this body, the Government notes
the strong statements from the Committee that in their current form the
National Game Board and the Professional Game Board do not promote
strategic decision making. In that context, it is important that the body which
has responsibility for the licence has the appropriate power, skills,
accountability and representation to carry out this role effectively.

7

8

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

28. Therefore the Government urges the football authorities to focus sufficient
attention on ensuring that the body which oversees the licence is thoroughly
equipped for its role. In line with the other recommendations of the Committee,
we support the view that this body should report directly to the newly formed
Football Association Board.

Foreign ownership (paragraph 172)
29. The Government notes the comments made by the Committee on the
importance of not discouraging foreign ownership of English clubs. We
recognise the important contributions that foreign owners have made to our
national game and the performance of a number of clubs. At the same time the
Committee recommends that because of the inherent attraction of English
football clubs to foreign investors and markets, particularly robust criteria need
to be applied to prospective owners and directors before they are allowed to
own or run a club. The Government believes that this is one of the attractions
of introducing a consistent licensing model, overseen by the Football
Association.

Leveraged buyouts (paragraph 176)
30. The Government notes the evidence before the Committee on the use of
leveraged buyouts to purchase football clubs and the strong view of the
Committee on the appropriateness of this vehicle. The Government expects
that the issue of financial sustainability should be addressed as part of the
recommendations on the new licensing model.

Club ownership (paragraph 191 and 192)
31. The Government notes and welcomes the strong recommendations made by
the Select Committee in the area of club ownership. The evidence taken by the
Committee in this area demonstrates how clearly football governance has
failed to keep pace with the challenges of the modern game and the global
commercial attractiveness of English football.
32. We agree that robust ownership rules should be consistently applied across
the professional game as part of the licensing model with strong Football
Association scrutiny and oversight.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

33. Too many of the problems faced by clubs and the supporters who try to rescue
them have been caused when the ground becomes separated from the club.
We support the Committee’s recommendation that there should be a
presumption against selling a ground, unless it is in the best interests of the
club. The Government recommends that the football authorities include this
condition within the terms of the new licensing system and that it is rigorously
enforced. In addition the provisions in the Localism Bill currently before
Parliament could offer significant assistance to supporters. For example, they
would enable local supporters to apply to the local authority to have a facility
such as a football ground or training ground listed as an ‘asset of community
value’. Where that asset is then subsequently offered for sale, supporters or
the wider community would have a period in which they could mount a bid for
that asset.
34. The evidence taken by the Committee on the issue of the transparency of
ownership of clubs should have concerned everyone who heard it. The
Committee’s recommendation that there should be complete transparency
around ownership and the terms of loans provided by Directors offers owners
the opportunity to clearly demonstrate their good intentions towards the club to
the authorities and the club’s supporters. It is hard to see any well-intentioned
owner or owners refusing such transparency. In responding to these
recommendations we strongly urge the football authorities to include this
recommendation within the new licensing system as a key condition.

A way forward for supporter ownership (paragraphs 218222)
35. The Government welcomes the Committee’s focus on increasing the ability of
supporter-owned clubs to raise funds and increasing the opportunity for
supporters’ trusts to achieve a share in their clubs.
36. The Department notes the specific recommendations to the Government
relating to the Financial Services Management Act 2000 and the protection of
minority supporter stakes in the event of compulsory purchase orders. We are
currently in the process of discussing with other Departments, including HM
Treasury and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, the legality
and practicability of the recommended changes in these areas. Given the
potential need for legislative changes, there will naturally be a high threshold in
order to justify Government action.
37. The Government will consider bringing together an informal expert group to
report on the degree to which there are other issues that create genuine
barriers and to provide recommendations for practical action.

9

10

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

38. The Government supports the Committee’s recommendation about effective
consultation with fans. The Government believes that every club should have a
dedicated and mandatory supporter liaison officer. Furthermore, that every club
should officially recognise the relevant supporters groups or trusts and keep an
open dialogue with them. They should hold official and regular annual general
meetings at which these groups are invited to take part and at which
appropriate financial and other information can be shared and consulted upon.
39. The Government believes that these conditions should be an explicit condition
of the football licensing model recommended by the Committee and so
compliance should be a requirement of the club competing within the English
game.
40. Furthermore, the Government urges the football authorities to consider ways to
actively encourage and incentivise methods of including supporter
representatives on the Boards of clubs. We see the value in the views of many
supporters that such representatives should have a full role within the club
Board. At the same time, we acknowledge that this may not be the right
solution for all clubs or all supporters. Where there are ways of achieving this
role in an advisory capacity that do not attract fiduciary responsibilities that
could create conflicts of interest, then we urge the football authorities to also
consider this route. Whatever the way that representation is achieved, we
believe that there is every reason to think that clubs are stronger because they
have supporters at the heart of the club, not weaker.
41. One option that we have considered is to specify within the new club licensing
system a trigger point that would require clubs to make a seat available to one
or more supporters’ representatives on the Board. Such a trigger point could be
the next time the club changes hands; the point at which the officially
recognised supporters organisations reach a certain size; or by a majority vote
of eligible supporters. There will be other options as well.
42. The Government recognises that these would be major steps that would mark
a change in the corporate governance landscape of football ownership in this
country. It would need to be accompanied by a similar step-change in the
professionalism and skills of supporters’ representatives. It is for the football
authorities to determine the best way of achieving the right changes, but
Government will welcome and support those discussions.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Supporters Direct (paragraph 231)
43. Supporters Direct is an effective and influential organisation which makes a
vital contribution to enabling supporters to play an informed role in helping to
secure the future of their club, either through greater involvement or outright
ownership. There is no doubt that many of the instances of successful
supporter engagement with clubs would not have been possible without the
advice and engagement of Supporters Direct.
44. The financial and governance problems that have affected Supporters Direct
over the last few months have not reflected well on our national game, the
organisation itself or its funders. The Government believes that a solution to
provide funding for the long-term future of Supporters Direct and other
high-profile supporters group representative bodies should not be beyond the
skill of the football authorities, working closely with the bodies concerned. The
Government commits to support those discussions wherever appropriate.

Strategic planning: youth development (paragraph 244)
45. The Government notes the Committee’s statement that the correct strategy for
youth development is properly a matter for the football authorities. We look
forward to a successful conclusion to the current negotiations between the
Premier League and Football League on the operation of the planned new Elite
Player Performance Plan which offers the opportunity to make a fundamental
change to the way in which elite players are identified and developed.
46. The Government wants the England teams and all our national sides - men
and women, and all ages - to be as successful as possible in international
competition. Although not a specific part of the Select Committee’s remit, a
number of witnesses drew parallels between changes in football governance
and ultimate improvement in England team performances.
47. The Government suggests the football authorities consider the scope of the
Committee’s recommended new licensing system to reflect a renewed focus on
ensuring the best possible support for the national teams. For example, it has
been argued that the inclusion of full mandatory release powers in such a
licence could increase the ability of the Football Association to run successful
England teams in the Under 17, 19 and 21 categories. No one should ever
expect the dynamic between players, clubs and national teams to be
straightforward, but rebalancing the approach to mean that there is a legitimate
expectation that the best English players – at every age - will be selected for
their national team could be a significant practical step forward.
48. The Government urges the football authorities to consider such an initiative
and others to make sure that England teams are in the best possible position to
reap the rewards of their talent in the competitive cycle from 2012-13.

11

12

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Strategic development: coaching (paragraph 248)
49. The Government recognises the weight of evidence considered by the
Committee on the issue of coaching, in particular the historic weaknesses in
England in developing the kind of high-level technical expertise in coaching
that appears to have been so important in the success of other nations at
international level.
50. The Government notes the recent actions of the Football Association to
redress the balance and to build a broad-based coaching structure. The
Government also notes and welcomes the Football Association’s expectation
that the new National Football Centre at St George’s Park, Burton will be a
major asset in making sure that more of the coaches who achieve their first
qualifications work their way to the top.
51. The Government welcomes this commitment by the Football Association to
deliver the best possible player and coach development centre at St George’s
Park. We will work closely with them in their drive to bring England’s coaches
up to world-class standards.

Finance (paragraph 253)
52. The Government is proud to support grassroots participation in our national
game and in the improvement of facilities. Over the course of the current
Spending Review period we are committing £25.6m through Sport England to
the Football Association for participation. We are also investing £10m per year
into the Football Foundation to improve facilities all over the country, in
partnership with the Premier League and Football Association.
53. Football offers an obvious route to increased sporting participation and
Government will maintain its focus on ensuring that football, like all those
sports supported through the Whole Sport Plan process, deliver on their
commitments. The Government is particularly keen that sports address the
specific issues relating to participation in the 14-25 age group.
54. The Government recognises the Committee’s recommendation that the
Football Association review their expenditure on the grassroots. At the same
time, we note that within the football family, responsibility for funding
participation and facilities is not absolutely limited to the governing body, but
also necessarily extends to those with significant income from the sale of
broadcasting rights.
55. The Government expects that a Football Association review of their
expenditure should be complemented by a review by the Football League and
Premier League.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

56. As the national game, football has exceptional reach into every community in
this country. It is therefore able to deliver important benefits to the wider society
outside the game itself and can play a big part in helping to rebuild parts of our
society which recent events have shown to be so lacking in positive focus and
opportunity. Coaches, players and volunteers should be important positive role
models to whom young people can look up, particularly in the absence of other
influential figures in their lives. The Football Association’s Respect campaign is
clearly an important part of that process and the Government encourages the
football authorities to continue to strengthen this campaign. Furthermore
Government and football should take every opportunity to redouble our
partnership in this crucial area.

Other important issues
57. Although not explicitly covered in the Committee’s report, there are three
additional issues on which the Government hopes that the football authorities
will be able to work together successfully. The first is that of the role that
football can play in addressing homophobia and transphobia in sport and wider
society. As part of the Government’s commitment to promoting equality a
Charter for Action was launched with sports organisations in March this year.
This sets out the direction needed to tackle homophobia and transphobia to
make sport a welcoming environment by challenging discrimination and other
unacceptable behaviour.
58. The success of campaigns such as Kick it Out show just how effective the
football authorities can be when they work together to challenge discrimination
head-on. Such campaigns have a resonance that goes far beyond sport.
59. The Government believes the time is now right for the football authorities to
follow-through on their welcome commitment to support the Charter for Action
with a high-profile and well-resourced campaign to tackle homophobia and
transphobia. The Government hopes that the Leagues will actively support this
campaign at the highest level including, where appropriate, the use of wellknown players and other figures within the campaign.
60. The second issue concerns the disciplinary process that operates within
football. The Government believes that there is a good case to be made for the
policy-making and decision and sanctions process to be modernised to ensure
that there is the best possible support for disciplinary decisions across the
game. It is right that policy-making on disciplinary issues sits with the Football
Association and that rules and regulations are made in consultation with all
those with an interest. It then seems appropriate that having made those rules
and with support in their implementation in letter and spirit by the football
authorities, the charging and decision-making process is handled outside the
Football Association, by an accountable, but independent and separate
organisation. Yet at the moment the policy-making, charging and decisionmaking sit within one body.

13

14

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

61. The Government hopes that the football authorities will see the value in that
separation of responsibilities and that they will come forward with a proposal
that will strengthen the credibility of football in dealing with disciplinary issues.
62. Finally, another area of discipline that the Government takes very seriously is
the issue of doping in sport. We welcome the work carried out by the Football
Association to combat the threat of doping. The Government would like to see
the Football Association and UK Anti-Doping continue to cooperate to enhance
and improve these efforts, to ensure both that the Football Association’s antidoping rules are fully compliant with the United Kingdom’s Anti-Doping Policy
and that the threat of doping in football is effectively addressed.

The way forward (paragraph 261)
63. The Government notes and supports the Committee’s assessment that almost
all their recommendations can be achieved through agreement between the
football authorities and without the need for legislation.
64. The Government expects that the football authorities, having considered the
report carefully, will now respond positively and collectively with an agreed
strategy and a timetable for change.
65. The Government believes that the immediate priorities are three-fold: the
creation of a modern, accountable and representative FA Board; agreement to
the implementation of a licensing framework administered by the Football
Association in close cooperation with the professional game; and agreement to
changes to the decision-making structures within the Football Association,
specifically in relation to the Council.
66. We expect the football authorities to work together to agree proposals,
including plans for implementation, by 29 February 2012. The new Board can
then agree the way forward for the remainder of the recommendations, ideally
for implementation for the start of the 2012-13 football season.
67. The Government is fully committed to ensuring that the changes put forward by
the football authorities make a lasting and substantive difference. If that does
not happen the Government will introduce a legal requirement on the Football
Association to implement the appropriate governance clauses by the swiftest
possible means. To do that the Government will seek to secure, using all
available channels, appropriate legislation as soon as Parliamentary time
allows. There is a strong case for such legislative proposals to be formally
considered in pre-legislative scrutiny.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

3 Summary
68. It is not for Government to run football, or any other sport. Sports are best
governed by modern, transparent, accountable and representative national
governing bodies, which are able to act decisively in the long-term interests of
the sport.
69. The Committee’s report lays out in stark detail the way in which the existing
structures, governance arrangements and relationships have failed to keep
pace with the challenges and expectations surrounding the modern game.
70. The Government believes that the Select Committee’s report sets out a
package of conclusions and recommendations that offer a sound blueprint for
the future of football governance in this country.
71. The report is an opportunity for the football authorities to come together and
demonstrate their ability to respond collectively to the challenges laid out in the
report.
72. Our expectation is that the football authorities will now agree and publish a joint
response to these recommendations and set out the process for how they
intend to take forward their plans.
73. The Government believes that the immediate priorities are three-fold: the
creation of a modern, accountable and representative FA Board; agreement to
the implementation of a licensing framework administered by the Football
Association in close cooperation with the professional game; and agreement to
changes to the decision-making structures within the Football Association,
specifically in relation to the Council.
74. We expect the football authorities to work together to agree proposals,
including plans for implementation, by 29 February 2012. The new Board can
then agree the way forward for the remainder of the recommendations, ideally
for implementation for the start of the 2012-13 football season.
75. The Government is fully committed to ensuring that the changes put forward by
the football authorities make a lasting and substantive difference. If that does
not happen the Government will introduce a legal requirement on the Football
Association to implement the appropriate governance clauses by the swiftest
possible means. To do that the Government will seek to secure, using all
available channels, appropriate legislation as soon as Parliamentary time
allows. There is a strong case for such legislative proposals to be formally
considered in pre-legislative scrutiny.

15

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

