Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Science and Heritage: Response to
the House of Lords Select
Committee on Science and
Technology

Cm 8384

£6.25

Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Science and Heritage: Response to
the House of Lords Select
Committee on Science and
Technology

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Culture,
Olympics, Media and Sport by Command of Her Majesty
July 2012

Cm 8384

£6.25

© Crown copyright 2012
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium,
under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
This publication is available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk
This document is also available from our website at www.culture.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101838429
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2498777

07/12

19585

22435

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

3

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Introduction
1. The Government thanks the Lords Science and Technology Committee for the
Science and Heritage Follow-up Report which was published on 11 May 2012,
and for its findings and recommendations.
2. In responding to the Report, the Government re-iterates its recognition of the
intrinsic value of our cultural heritage, of the sector’s importance to the social,
cultural and economic life of the United Kingdom and of the role it plays in
attracting tourists to this country.
3. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) sees heritage as having
a clear role to play in supporting growth and welcomes the emphasis made in
the follow up report to the significance of the sector to the UK economy. The
Government has recently championed the importance of heritage in its GREAT
campaign. DCMS also recognises the importance of the science of caring for
heritage collections for now and for future generations, and is clear that
preservation cannot be taken for granted.

Summary of the Government response to the recommendations
4. Each of the recommendations made by the Lords Select Committee on Science
and Technology are set out in the section below followed by a response. DCMS
and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) have contributed
to the response by the Government.
5. The Government acknowledges that the Committee made a number of
recommendations intended for Research Councils UK (RCUK) and the National
Heritage Science Forum (NHSF). The Government therefore invited these
organisations to contribute to the Government’s response and this is included at
Appendix A. The Government would like to thank RCUK, and the seven
research councils within its partnership that responded to its submission, and
the NHSF for their contributions.
6. In summary, the Government supports the Committee’s work to monitor the
heritage and science community’s work on heritage science and the
conservation of our cultural heritage.
7. DCMS notes the Committee’s conclusions about the Department’s moral
leadership role in championing heritage science but equally feels it would be
wrong to assume that Government should be both thought leader and standard
setter in a technical and scientific field of this kind, particularly when an
increasingly vibrant and capable heritage science academy is developing to
provide a pluralist and diverse alternative approach. Encouraging and
supporting the heritage science community’s continued growth through arms
length bodies and other forums should deliver the robust and sustainable

4

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

leadership which the Committee rightly recommends, and with which DCMS
agrees, but through a different mechanism instead.
8. The responsibility on the DCMS ALBs to care for collections and heritage
assets, where appropriate to their remit, is enshrined through robust
governance mechanisms. It is set out clearly in the funding agreements as a
condition of government funding, and the protection of heritage is included in
the governing legislation of the national museums, and the wider heritage
sector.
9. With regard to the Chief Scientific Adviser and accessing scientific advice, in
this instance heritage science, DCMS is of the view that it is neither appropriate
nor workable for the Department to precisely replicate the model and specialist
roles existing in other Government departments. DCMS has therefore worked to
find an approach congruent with the size of the Department, particular
management structure and the continuing programme of staff reductions, which
also takes into account the expectation that many activities are best delivered
directly by its ALBs.
10. The Government supports the work of its ALBs with a remit for heritage and
cultural preservation and the wider heritage community, including the NHSF and
RCUK, in their work to disseminate good practice, to collaborate across
institutions, to increase capacity across the community, to continue efforts to
digitise our cultural heritage and to increase public engagement with heritage
science, and will offer support where appropriate.
11. The Government has demonstrated its strong commitment to science and
research by protecting the programme budget within BIS in the Spending
Review 2010 settlement, including the funding for AHRC. In addition, it has
pressed for the clearest possible recognition of the importance of research in
the social sciences and humanities in the proposed Horizon 2020 funding
programme and has supported a series of amendments to the original proposal
which strengthened its role and visibility in the text. The Government believes
that cultural heritage research can expect strong support from EU funding
through Horizon 2020.

5

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Recommendations and findings of the Lords
Committee Report
____________________________________
12. In this section the Government sets out its response to each of the
recommendations of the Select Committee follow-up report with the
recommendations set out in bold.
Research Councils
13. Recommendation 1
We share the concern expressed by a number of witnesses that funding
should be provided to enable the progress achieved to date by the
Science and Heritage Programme to continue after 2013 when it comes to
an end. We recommend that the AHRC (Arts and Humanities Research
Council) and the EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council) take steps to ensure that the momentum generated by the
Programme is not lost.
14. The Government welcomes the priority the AHRC, working closely with the
other Research Councils, has given to heritage science since the Committee’s
initial report (see Appendix A below for the RCUK’s response to this specific
recommendation). We note the AHRC’s commitment to continuing to recognise
heritage science research as a strategically important and valuable subject. In
the Spending Review of October 2010, the Government demonstrated its strong
commitment to science and research by protecting the programme budget with
BIS with a flat-cash, ring-fenced settlement of £4.6bn per annum over this
Spending Review period including the AHRC which receives just under £100m.
National Heritage Science Strategy and Forum
15. Recommendation 2
We welcome the development of the National Heritage Science Strategy
(NHSS). However, we urge the steering group to underpin NHSS
objectives with detailed specifications of the actions required to achieve
those objectives, identifying who is responsible for their achievement and
according to what timescale. We encourage the National Heritage Science
Forum to take responsibility for ensuring that heritage institutions give
“institutional buy-in” to the NHSS objectives and we encourage heritage
institutions to consider how they can contribute to the achievement of
NHSS objectives.

6

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

16. The Government supports this recommendation and notes that whilst the NHSF
is at its development stage, it has already attracted institutional members as
noted in point 6 of Appendix A.
17. The Government encourages its ALBs to consider their appropriate level of
participation in the NHSS objectives, noting that English Heritage is contributing
through the development of its Science Strategy which was initiated in late
2011. This Science Strategy will set out how English Heritage will respond
specifically to the NHSS objectives and act as a powerful catalyst for sharing of
information among English Heritage’s scientists engaged in practicing and
advising on archaeological science, interiors and collections conservation and
structural conservation. It will also underpin the operation and development of
the National Heritage Protection Plan.
18. Recommendation 3
Whist we acknowledge that the Forum is still only in the early stages of
development, we recognise that is has significant potential as a collective
voice and vehicle for the leadership of the heritage science community,
and as a means of stimulating collaboration between members of the
community. It is time for the Forum to provide clear leadership and to
enable the community to demonstrate that it is committed to acting upon
the NHSS as well as discussing priorities.
19. The Government also recognises that NHSF is at the early stages of
development and welcomes the start-up funding provided by AHRC to allow the
NHSF to be hosted at the Science and Heritage programme office at University
College London. We note that NHSF is not yet at a stage to respond to this
recommendation specifically, as noted in point 6 of Appendix A.
20. As with the NHSS, the Government encourages its ALBs to respond to the
NHSF as appropriate within the scope of their own remits and objectives. We
note that English Heritage, as a member of NHSF, has committed to help to
provide leadership through the direct actions arising from its Science Strategy
as well as support the wider objectives of the NHSS.
DCMS and its arm’s length bodies
21. Recommendation 4
We recommend that, before the next round of funding negotiations with
its arm’s length bodies, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport sets
specific departmental objectives for heritage science related to its
departmental objectives to “protect our nation’s cultural heritage”.
Similarly, DCMS ALBs should set out how they will help achieve these
objectives in funding agreement negotiations with the department. At the
appropriate time, fulfilling these objectives should be taken into account
in negotiations prior to the next Comprehensive Spending Review.

7

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

22. The DCMS Business Plan sets out a number of significant structural reforms
that the Department will be making over 2012 to 2015. In addition to the reforms
listed in the Business Plan, the Department has a number of other major
responsibilities, including protecting the nation’s cultural heritage.
23. This was also reflected in the last Spending Review 2010 when the Secretary of
State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport set out the four principles that he
used to make decisions on funding for the Department’s ALBs. One of these
principles was the protection of cultural, heritage and sporting assets for the
long term. It was on this basis that spending review decisions were made,
including the decisions to limit cuts to the national museums to 15% in real
terms over the spending period and to ask English Heritage to protect spending
on funding for planning advice, grants for heritage at risk and the conservation
and maintenance of sites in its care, and cut no more than 15% in real terms.
24. This principle was set out in the spending review allocation letters which were
sent to each body in 2010 and will feature in the Management Agreements that
will be issued to the ALBs to cover the period of 2012/13 and to 2014/15. In
addition to this, the protection of heritage assets is included in the governing
legislation of the national museums, English Heritage and the Churches
Conservation Trust and the Royal Charter of the British Film Institute.
Protection and conservation are fundamental elements of protecting cultural and
heritage assets for the long term. As such, it is clear to the DCMS ALBs through
their spending review allocations, Management Agreements and legislation that
heritage science is an integral element of their responsibilities.
25. DCMS agrees performance indicators with many of its ALBs, which will be set
out in their Management Agreements for this spending review period. We are
currently discussing these Agreements with ALBs and the policy is to set a
maximum of two key performance indicators and a small number of other
indicators which will be used to monitor progress and enable the body to focus
on key priorities. DCMS will discuss with the relevant ALBs whether a specific
indicator relating to heritage science is appropriate in their Management
Agreements.
26. Recommendation 5
Given the importance of heritage science to the sustainability of the
contribution heritage makes to the economy, failure to find the resources
to enable the appointment of a Chief Scientific Adviser (CSA) would
amount to negligent short-termism. The CSA post has been vacant since
2010 – more than sufficient time for DCMS to find a “workable solution”.
We recommend that DCMS appoints a CSA without further delay.
27. We agree with the importance of finding a workable solution, and believe we
have done so. DCMS is a small department which has undergone a significant
reduction in staff numbers since 2010 so a standard CSA appointment is not
affordable. But we are now in a position to look to recruit a principal scientific
adviser with the title of Head of Analysis (at Civil Service Grade 5 level) who will

8

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

perform the main function of a CSA which is ensuring that the Department
accesses relevant scientific advice to inform policy making, working with CSAs
from across Whitehall and beyond.
28. DCMS is working with the Government Chief Scientific Adviser and the
Government Office for Science to establish mechanisms for the post-holder to
draw on the advice and varied expertise of the CSA network. This will
strengthen the Department’s capacity to access wider scientific advice,
including on heritage science, via the Science and Research Advisory
Committee where we are simultaneously working to add to the expertise
available to us by recruiting further members. DCMS expects to have the role
filled by autumn 2012.
Dissemination of best practice
29. Recommendation 6
We encourage Icon to develop their website to contain an up-to-date
online catalogue of scientific literature relevant to heritage science, where
possible including abstracts, which should be accessible to all heritage
scientists and users of this research across the UK.
30. We understand that Icon will be writing to the Select Committee with a formal
response to this specific recommendation in due course.
European Union Funding
31. Recommendation 7
We recommend that DCMS and the Department for Business, Innovation
and Skills (BIS) make the case for the inclusion of heritage science in
European Commission Framework Programme 8 (Horizon 2020). We
encourage the heritage science community and research councils to make
every effort to secure funding for heritage science from European Union
sources.
32. The UK has been actively pressing for the clearest possible recognition of the
importance of research in the social sciences and humanities in the proposed
Horizon 2020 funding programme and has supported a series of amendments
to the original proposal which strengthened its role and visibility in the text.
33. In addition to an overarching statement which clearly recognises the need to
integrate such research (including that in the cultural heritage area) in all parts
of the Horizon 2020 programme, the text of the proposed Horizon 2020
Regulation now contains specific references to the role of cultural heritage in
several places. In particular cultural heritage is explicitly mentioned in the
“Climate Action, Resource Efficiency and Raw Materials" part of the Societal
Challenges pillar (reflecting the valuable work already being undertaken by the
Joint Programming Initiative in this area in which the UK Research Councils are
very active). In addition the list of Societal Challenges has been modified in

9

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

negotiation with the UK's support. This now contains one on "Europe in a
Changing World - Inclusive, Innovative and Reflective Societies". The
"Reflective Societies" part of this Challenge is focused on cultural heritage and
European identity. The Government therefore believes that cultural heritage
research can now expect strong support from EU funding through Horizon 2020.
34. This recommendation is also responded to by RCUK in point 14 of Appendix A.
Private funding
35. Recommendation 8
Philanthropic and industry funding has the potential to make an important
contribution to meeting heritage science funding needs. We urge the
Forum to explore the possibility of obtaining private, possibly matched,
funding – consulting, where appropriate, bodies (such as university
museums, the research councils and the Getty conservation Institute)
which have demonstrated an effective track record in this area. We also
recommend that DCMS make every effort to increase private (both
philanthropic and industry) funding for heritage science and to
communicate these efforts to the community.
36. We agree that philanthropy has an important part to play in supporting heritage
science. DCMS will continue to play a leading role in promoting philanthropy
across its sectors and in tandem with other Government Departments.
Government has taken significant steps to encourage philanthropy through
measures to encourage legacy giving, simplify gift aid and establish a new
Cultural Gifts Scheme. In partnership with the Heritage Lottery Fund and Arts
Council England, our £100 million programme of match funding will strengthen
fundraising capacity and expertise across our sectors. We have recently
announced endowment grants totalling over £25 million to sixteen museums
and heritage bodies. We are also working closely with the Heritage Alliance to
boost giving to smaller heritage bodies. We have facilitated access to historic
reserves for our national museums, the British Library and English Heritage. All
of these activities have the potential to strengthen philanthropic giving to the
benefit of heritage science, but while Government can create the conditions for
effective donor cultivation, it cannot substitute for the leadership which needs to
be demonstrated by the heritage community if it is to compete effectively for
private donations.
Capacity
37. Recommendation 9
Although new scientists have been attracted into heritage science there is
some concern about the loss of senior posts and long-term maintenance
of capacity in the field. We recommend that the AHRC, as lead research
council responsible for heritage science, should ensure that steps are
taken to assess and monitor the health and discipline. We anticipate that
this will be an area of work to which the Forum will wish to make a

10

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

contribution. If these concerns prove to be founded, we recommend that
DCMS, the research councils, the Forum and heritage institutions take
appropriate action to ensure that the long-term health of the heritage
community is assured.
38. The Government notes that RCUK have responded to this recommendation in
points 16 to 17 of Appendix A. In this, AHRC explains that the need to build
capacity in the heritage science research has been established and that heritage
has been identified as one of the three priority areas for specific support.
39. The Government supports the recommendation to ensure the long term health
of the heritage community through attracting new scientists to heritage science
and encourages its ALBs to contribute to RCUK and the NHSF’s research into
this as appropriate. English Heritage’s Science Strategy will be informed by its
sector intelligence on skills gaps and losses and the organisation’s own efforts
to ensure that its staff expertise is sustained and enhanced.
Collaboration
40. Recommendation 10
We commend the efforts which have been made by the heritage science
community to increase collaboration. We encourage the heritage science
community to explore how they can best work together to share
resources, expertise and experience throughout the UK. Given the
objectives of the NHSS, we anticipate that the Forum will wish to assist in
promoting these collaborative efforts.
41. The Government encourages those ALBs with a remit for heritage preservation
to increase their collaboration and explore shared resources, expertise and
experience, working with the NHSF as appropriate.
42. English Heritage is working actively with AHRC to seek areas for fruitful
collaboration and in May 2012, the two organisations co-hosted an academic
workshop to consider priorities for heritage conservation in the context of AHRC
current and future themes and programmes, and English Heritage’s National
Heritage Protection Plan.
Independent Research Organisation Status
43. Recommendation 11
We acknowledge that there is an issue for those organisations which are
unable to access funding because of their ineligibility for Independent
Research Organisation status (IRO). We encourage organisations within the
heritage science community who would like IRO status to explore whether it
would be possible to develop consortia, perhaps on a regional or thematic
basis, to apply as a collective for IRO status and bid for funding. The
research councils should offer assistance to any group of organisations
intending to form a consortium to help them achieve IRO status.

11

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

44. The Government notes this recommended approach and also notes that RCUK
are able to consider consortia applications where the bidding organisations
comply with IRO status criteria. RCUK’s response to this recommendation is set
out in points 20 – 21 of Appendix A.
Public engagement
45. Recommendation 12
Public engagement with heritage science provides a mechanism for
stimulating interest in science, engineering and technology. We commend
the activities that have been undertaken in this respect and urge the
community to work together to plan programmes for public engagement,
avoiding overlap and sharing resources wherever possible.
46. The Government acknowledges the importance of public engagement with
heritage science and therefore supports the recommendation for the heritage
science community to collaborate on their planning. We note that one of the key
aims of the NHSF, set out in point 4 of Appendix A, is to demonstrate the public
benefit of heritage science and to increase public engagement and support for
it.
A UK digitisation framework
47. Recommendation 13
We recommend that DCMS and BIS, with the involvement of the Forum,
facilitate the development of a digitisation framework to promote and
manage digitisation of cultural heritage.
48. The Government recognises that digitisation has huge potential to facilitate
wider and higher quality access to and understanding of cultural collections and
artefacts. It also recognises that ALBs such as The National Archives, the
National Museums and the British Library have led innovative programmes to
promote and manage digitisation of our cultural assets. English Heritage is
developing additional capacity building strategies to complement the English
Heritage Science Strategy, one of which specifically covers improving access to
information through digital technologies.
49. There is therefore evidence to show that museums, libraries and archives have
a clear priority to make cultural assets accessible digitally and that public
/private partnerships are proving to be an effective and productive funding
model for digitisation on cultural heritage.
50. The Government does not wish however to impose a top-down centralised
structure to any digitisation framework and will therefore ask its ALBs and the
sector to work with the NHSF on a national or international framework as
appropriate to their remit.

12

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Appendix A Research Council UK (RCUK) response to the House of Lords
Science and Technology Committee Science and Heritage Follow Up Report.
1.

Research Councils UK (RCUK) is a strategic partnership set up to champion
research supported by the seven UK Research Councils. RCUK was established
in 2002 to enable the Councils to work together more effectively to enhance the
overall impact and effectiveness of their research, training and innovation
activities, contributing to the delivery of the Government’s objectives for science
and innovation. Further details are available at www.rcuk.ac.uk

2.

This response is submitted by RCUK and represents its independent views. It
does not include, or necessarily reflect the views of the Department for Business,
Innovation and Skills (BIS). The submission is made on behalf of the following
Councils:
Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC)
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC)
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC)
Medical Research Council (MRC)
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)
Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC)

3.

The following is the RCUK response to each of the recommendations, made in the
Lords Science and Technology Committee ‘Science and Heritage: a follow-up
report’, which are relevant to the Research Councils.

4.

There are also a number of recommendations in the report which concern the
National Heritage Science Forum (NHSF). The NHSF emerged as the key
recommendation of the sector-led National Heritage Science Strategy. It has two
clear aims:
(i) to demonstrate the public benefit of heritage science and to increase public
engagement and support for it, and
(ii) to improve partnership with the sector and with others by increasing
collaboration and to help practice make better use of research, knowledge and
innovation and to enhance resources, funding and skills. The Forum is
intended to be a membership organisation supported in the first instance by
cultural organisations such as museums, heritage agencies and universities
involved in cultural heritage research.

5.

The aims of the NHSF resonated with those of the AHRC/EPSRC Science and
Heritage programme. Because of this, the AHRC agreed to provide start-up funds
for the Forum to be hosted by the Science and Heritage programme office at UCL.
These funds were for a part-time coordinator with the expectation that the Forum
would become self-sustaining after 18 months.

6.

The Forum has now been in development since November 2011 and is already
attracting paying institutional members. To provide guidance, a transitional board

13

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

is being formed to advise the coordinator on issues to raise with new and potential
members such as the governance structure and activities, including realising the
relevant recommendations from ‘Science and Heritage: a follow-up report’. As the
Forum is at an early stage of development and membership, and is not yet truly
representative of the sector, it would be premature for the Forum to provide a
detailed response at this stage.
7.

Recommendation 1: We share the concern expressed by a number of
witnesses that funding should be provided to enable the progress achieved
to date by the Science and Heritage Programme to continue after 2013 when
it comes to an end. We recommend that the AHRC and the EPSRC take
steps to ensure that the momentum generated by the Programme is not lost.

8.

RCUK welcomes the committee’s recognition of the commitment of the Research
Councils to heritage science and the response of the AHRC to the first report, in
particular the establishment of the Science and Heritage programme in
conjunction with EPSRC. The success of the programme so far is demonstrated
by the positive feedback provided to the committee by organisations involved with
heritage science. The AHRC will continue to work with the EPSRC to ensure that
the benefits of the Science and Heritage programme are maximised up to its
completion in 2013 and beyond.

9.

Building on the progress made by the Science and Heritage programme and the
increased research capacity it has brought, the AHRC is now also supporting
heritage science through programmes developed in the current spending review
period.

10. Heritage is one of three key areas, along with Design and Modern Languages,
earmarked in the AHRC Delivery Plan 2011-15 for specific support to sustain
national capability. The second round of the Collaborative Skills Development
scheme will be launched later this year to support innovative training programmes
for postgraduate students and early-career researchers in the three key areas,
including heritage. The second phase of the AHRC’s Block Grant Partnership
(BGP), starting in 2014, will include a specific route for applications in the three
key areas, again including heritage.
11. The AHRC Delivery Plan 2011-15 also makes provision for developing new areas
for cross-disciplinary heritage research through the research themes, ‘Care for the
Future’ and ‘Science in Culture’. The themes encourage multi-disciplinary
approaches which can include heritage science. Care for the Future, for example,
will support research looking at the adaption of heritage to future challenges such
as climate change.
12. In the longer term, the Research Councils will assess priorities for future support
through the next Spending Review process and heritage science will be included
in this review. Until then the AHRC will continue to recognise heritage science
research as a strategically important and vulnerable subject and will continue to
act as the lead Research Council responsible for this area, working with the other
Councils as appropriate.

14

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

13. Recommendation 7: We recommend that DCMS and BIS make the case for
the inclusion of heritage science in FP8 (Horizon 2020). We encourage the
heritage science community and research councils to make every effort to
secure funding for heritage science from EU sources.
14. The AHRC, working with BIS, has been very actively involved with the
consultation on Horizon 2020 and has consistently made the case for the inclusion
of heritage research in the Horizon 2020 Societal Challenges in particular. BIS
have been supportive of this position and it has been put forward as part of the
negotiation process; some other member states are also keen on its inclusion.
Although still under negotiation and not yet finalised, the text does now currently
include reference to Cultural Heritage in two of the seven grand challenges.
15. Recommendation 9: We recommend that the AHRC, as lead research
council responsible for heritage science, should ensure that steps are taken
to assess and monitor the health of the discipline. We anticipate that this
will be an area of work to which the Forum will wish to make a contribution.
If these concerns prove to be founded, we recommend that DCMS, the
research councils, the Forum and heritage institutions take appropriate
action to ensure that the long-term health of heritage community is assured.
16. As set out in the AHRC Delivery Plan 2011-15, the AHRC works closely with the
Funding Councils to monitor national capability across the range of arts and
humanities disciplines, including core areas where reduced capacity has been
identified. As noted above, the need to build capacity in the area of heritage
science research has been established and Heritage has been identified as one of
three priority areas for specific support to sustain national capability.
17. Informally, the AHRC, through its advisory groups and the steering committees for
its programmes, and through its relationship with bodies like English Heritage,
obtains information about reduced capacity and skills gaps in the heritage sector.
However, the AHRC will investigate the value of including the National Heritage
Science Forum (NHSF) more closely in these discussions. The AHRC has
provided start-up funds for the NHSF via the Science and Heritage programme.
18. It is important to note that Research Councils are not generally the employers of
heritage science research staff.
19. Recommendation 11: We encourage organisations within the heritage
science community who would like IRO status to explore whether it would
be possible to develop consortia, perhaps on a regional or thematic basis,
to apply as a collective for IRO status and bid for funding. The research
councils should offer assistance to any group of organisations intending to
form a consortium to help them achieve IRO status.
20. Individual organisations applying for IRO status must demonstrate an existing inhouse capacity to carry out research that materially extends and enhances the
national research base and an independent capability to undertake and lead
research programmes. They must also satisfy other criteria related to their
financial and legal status. RCUK are able to consider consortia applications

15

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

where the organisations involved meet these requirements and there is an
appropriate governance framework with a lead organisation.
21. Outside of IRO status, non-academic organisations are able to collaborate on
many forms of Research Council funding grant as project partners, with a Higher
Education Institution (HEI) or IRO as the lead organisation on the grant.

Research Councils UK, June 2012

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents

