Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Draft Gambling (Licensing &
Advertising) Bill

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Culture,
Media and Sport by Command of Her Majesty
December 2012

CM 8497

£10.75

© Crown Copyright 2012
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence,
visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this document should be sent to us at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
This publication is available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk
This document is also available from our website at www.culture.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101849722
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID P002525322 12/12 25171 19585
Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

3

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

Contents

Page
1. Ministerial foreword

4

2. Background

6

3. Overview of the current regulatory
system

8

4. The case for change

13

5. Summary of proposals

17

6. Summary of regulatory impact
assessment

20

7. Draft Bill

21

8. Explanatory notes

23

4

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

1. Ministerial Foreword

The Government is committed to strengthening the regulation of remote
gambling to ensure that effective consumer protection measures are afforded
to all British based consumers.
Currently, consumers based in Great Britain face different consumer protection
arrangements, and have to deal with a myriad of different regulators,
depending on where the remote gambling they are taking part in is regulated.
This problem is growing as more countries permit online gambling. At the
same time, it is unfair to GB-licensed gambling operators that overseas
competitors benefit from access to the market in Great Britain without
necessarily bearing a fair share of the costs of regulation, or of research,
education and treatment of problem gambling.
This draft Bill allows for the amendment of the Gambling Act 2005 so that
remote gambling is regulated predominantly on a point of consumption basis.
Consequently, all operators selling into the British market, whether based here
or abroad, will be required to hold a Gambling Commission licence to enable
them to transact with British consumers and to advertise in Great Britain. Such
operators will consequently be subject to the provisions of the Gambling Act
2005, its regulations and the Gambling Commission’s social responsibility and

5

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

technical standards requirements. These operators will also be required to pay
Operating Licence fees, and to contribute to research, education and treatment
in relation to British problem gambling and regulatory costs
These proposals are an important measure to help address concerns about
problem gambling and to bridge a regulatory gap, by ensuring that British
consumers will enjoy consistent standards of protection, no matter which online
gambling site they visit. For example, previous work by the Gambling
Commission

has

highlighted

deficiencies

in

some

remote

operators’

arrangements for preventing underage play, and, for the first time, overseas
operators will be required to inform the UK regulator about suspicious betting
patterns to help fight illegal activity and corruption in sports betting.
Finally, these reforms will ensure consistency and a level playing field as all
overseas operators will be subject to the same regulatory standards and
requirements as British-based operators.
We look forward to hearing your views, and those of the Culture, Media & Sport
Select Committee who have been invited to carry out pre-legislative scrutiny.
We trust that this process will ensure that the Bill is well prepared for
introduction to Parliament.

Hugh Robertson MP
Minister for Sport & Tourism
Department for Culture, Media & Sport
December 2012

6

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

2. Background
The Gambling Act 2005 provided, for the first time, a mechanism for regulation
of remote gambling operators providing services in Great Britain. However,
experience since the existing regulatory regime came into effect in 2007
suggests that the regulation of overseas based remote gambling operators
selling products in Great Britain is not working as well as intended and has
become unsustainable. At present there are different regulatory standards and
approaches, and consumers based in Great Britain may experience varying
levels of protection depending on the operator they engage with.
The Department for Culture, Media & Sport and the Gambling Commission
jointly conducted a review in 2009 to examine the existing system of remote
gambling regulation. The review considered the regulation of overseas
operators, as well as ways to ensure overseas operators contribute fairly
towards the costs of research, education and treatment of problem gambling in
the UK.
The review proposed that overseas gambling operators should be required to
obtain a Gambling Commission licence in order to transact with, or advertise to,
British based consumers. This was adopted as the preferred option in the 12
week consultation which the Department for Culture, Media & Sport carried out
between March and June 2010. The consultation also proposed a more
stream-lined white listing process for non-EEA jurisdictions.
The consultation ran between 22 March and 18 June 2010 and provided an
opportunity for interested parties to make representations to Government over
the proposed reforms. The consultation received 38 responses. The majority of
respondents (approximately 57%) favoured the proposals. On 14 July 2011, the
then Minister for Tourism and Heritage, John Penrose MP, made a written

7

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

Ministerial statement to Parliament outlining the Government’s proposed
approach to reform of remote gambling regulation, in light of the responses
received during the consultation period. This draft Bill provides the means for
these reforms to be realised.

8

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

3. Overview of the current regulatory system
Under the current system remote gambling operators are required to hold a
Gambling Commission (GC) licence only if they have remote gambling
equipment located in Britain. Operators based outside Britain but licensed in
EEA member states and Gibraltar are permitted to advertise gambling services
in the UK in reliance on the licence issued in their home jurisdiction, as are
operators licensed in one of the jurisdictions contained in Regulations under
section 331 of the Act, otherwise known as ‘the white list’. There are four
places on the white list: Antigua and Barbuda, the Isle of Man, the States of
Alderney and Tasmania.
In 2001 the Gambling Review Body, chaired by Sir Alan Budd, recommended
that a proposed new gambling regulator license all forms of remote gambling.
The then Government agreed with that recommendation on the basis that
continued prohibition of remote gambling was neither desirable nor practical
and that it was more sensible to license and regulate British-based sites, rather
than leave customers having to gamble with offshore operators who may be
subject to less stringent regulation. The then Government decided that
gambling should be deemed to take place wherever the gambling operator is
based (i.e. place of supply).
It was hoped that a freer approach to advertising would provide maximum
reciprocal benefits for British businesses in terms of European and International
gambling markets. It was also expected that by demonstrating best practice in
gambling regulation in relation to operators here, Britain would be influential in
improving standards of regulation across Europe and internationally.

9

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

The main provisions of the Gambling Act 2005 came into force on 1 September
2007 and are based around three key licensing objectives:
•

Preventing gambling from being a source of crime or disorder, being
associated with crime or disorder or being used to support crime;

•

Ensuring that gambling is conducted in a fair and open way; and

•

Protecting children and other vulnerable persons from being harmed or
exploited by gambling.

In addition to creating the Gambling Commission, it introduced a new licensing
system requiring operators, key personnel and the premises on which gambling
takes place to be licensed. It also created new offences, including those
relating to the protection of children. For the first time, remote gambling was
brought within the regulatory framework and the Act provided for specific
operating licences for those wishing to provide gambling remotely.
British gambling regulation is currently based on the point of supply, with only
those operators who locate at least one piece of their remote gambling
equipment in Britain requiring a Gambling Commission licence. Overseas
operators who provide gambling facilities to customers based in this country via
the internet do not require a GB licence, although section 331(1) of the Act
prohibits them from advertising unless they are situated within the EEA
(including Gibraltar), or in one of the four jurisdictions that have been white
listed by the Secretary of State (Antigua & Barbuda, the Isle of Man, the States
of Alderney and Tasmania). Operators supplying gambling from these places
can therefore advertise their services in Britain in reliance on the licence issued
by their home jurisdiction (an arrangement which is unique to the British market
amongst EU Member States).
In addition to the statutory provisions contained on the face of the Gambling Act
and in its regulations, the Gambling Commission has developed a framework of

10

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

Licence Conditions and Codes of Practice (LCCP) to improve consumer
protection and to uphold the licensing objectives. The Gambling Commission
has the power to impose specific conditions on individual licences or categories
of licence, which means that specific issues can be addressed if necessary.
However, these conditions do not apply to operators who are based outside
Britain (as they are not licensed by the Gambling Commission).
Some of the particular measures included in the LCCP are:
•

reporting of suspicious betting activity to the Gambling Commission and
sports governing bodies;

•

in relation to casinos, reporting of suspected criminal activity to the
Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA);

•

robust procedures for preventing underage gambling and other social
responsibility measures;

•

requiring clear terms and conditions;

•

requiring transparent complaint procedures, including recourse to an
independent third party; and

•

reporting other key events, such as incidents of internal or external
fraud.

•

In relation to betting, reporting of suspicious betting patterns

•

Compulsory provision of pre-commitment options

•

Requirement for operators to contribute to research, education and
treatment;

•

independent system integrity and game fairness testing.

The ‘White List’
The Gambling Act allows the Secretary of State to designate non-EEA
jurisdictions permitted to advertise remote gambling services in Britain. This is
informally known as the ‘white list’. Jurisdictions that want to be added must
demonstrate that their regulatory system for gambling is robust and meets the

11

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

published criteria.
The criteria document is primarily based upon the Gambling Act’s three
licensing objectives (set out above). It also includes certain requirements in
respect of fair tax, and jurisdictions are assessed on whether they follow the
same core values which underpin the British regime. In assessing applications
for the ‘white list’, jurisdictions must also demonstrate that they have the
capacity, technical and regulatory ability, and political impetus necessary, to
enforce its regulation.
Once on the ‘white list’, jurisdictions must inform the Government of any
changes to their laws/regulatory systems. They must also comply with British
advertising provisions, in particular the relevant codes that are regulated by the
Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), as well as provide a list of their licensed
operators. The Secretary of State has reserve powers to remove jurisdictions
from the regulations if at any stage there is concern that their regulatory system
no longer satisfies the criteria or is jeopardising the licensing objectives.
EEA Member States and Gibraltar
Operators based in EEA Member States, including Gibraltar, have greater
freedom to advertise their services in Britain in that they can advertise gambling
freely to British consumers, subject to the relevant advertising code provisions,
in reliance on the licence issued by their home regulator.
The Advertising Codes
Gambling operators wishing to advertise in Britain need to comply with the
advertising codes of practice which apply to the form and media in which they
advertise their gambling facilities or services. The Secretary of State also has

12

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

powers under section 328 of the Act to make regulations with regard to the
form, content, timing and location of gambling advertisements.
There are three advertising Codes of Practice. The Broadcast Committee of
Advertising Practice (BCAP) and the Committee of Advertising Practice (CAP)
are supervised by the ASA. The ASA administer the codes and respond to
public concerns about gambling advertisements.
In particular the codes seek to ensure adverts don’t:
•

portray, condone or encourage gambling behaviour that is socially
irresponsible or could lead to financial, social or emotional harm;

•

exploit the susceptibilities, aspirations, credulity, inexperience or lack of
knowledge of children, young people or other vulnerable people;

•

suggest that gambling can be a solution to financial concerns;

•

link gambling to seduction, sexual success or enhanced attractiveness;
or

•

be likely to be of particular appeal to children or young persons,
especially by reflecting or being associated with youth culture.

Adverts that breach the code have to be amended or withdrawn. If serious or
repeated breaches of the advertising codes occur then the ASA may refer
advertisers to the Gambling Commission and broadcasters to OFCOM (the
Communications regulator) to consider legal or regulatory sanctions.
In addition to the CAP and BCAP Advertising Standards Codes, the gambling
industry has collectively devised its own Gambling Industry Code for Socially
Responsible Advertising. The Industry Code includes a 9pm watershed on all
broadcast gambling advertising with exceptions for bingo and lotteries and the
advertising of sports betting around televised sporting events. The Industry
Code also requires advertisements to display the gambleaware.co.uk address.

13

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

4. The case for change
Participation in remote gambling is steadily increasing. According to the British
Gambling Prevalence Survey 2010 (Gambling Commission, 2010) 73% (35.5
million) of the adult population in Great Britain participated in some form of
gambling in the year prior to the survey, with 14% using the internet to gamble including buying lottery tickets online, betting online, playing casino games,
bingo or other slot machine-style games and playing the football pools online.
The Gambling Commission’s report into Industry Statistics between April 2008
and September 2011 estimates that global remote gambling Gross Gambling
Yield (GGY) (excluding telephone betting) was £20.1 billion during 2011, which
represents 10% growth on the previous year. UK consumer GGY (includes
GGY generated with operators regulated overseas), which includes telephone
betting, is estimated to have grown 5% between 2010 and 2011 to reach £2
billion. As at 31 March 2012 there were 288 remote gambling activity Gambling
Commission licences held by 207 operators.
Risks to British consumers
Under the current arrangements set out in the Gambling Act 2005, only
operators with key equipment in Britain are required to be licenced by the
Gambling Commission, whilst operators in EEA member states, Gibraltar and
white listed jurisdictions may advertise their services in Britain in reliance on the
licence held in their home jurisdiction. The Government believes that the
current system is flawed and can no longer adequately ensure the continued
protections for British consumers the Act envisaged in a changing European
and International landscape. The Government therefore believes that it is
essential, now more than ever, for the protections envisaged in the Gambling
Act 2005 to be afforded to all British consumers, regardless with whom they
choose to gamble.

14

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

Whilst the Government recognises that the majority of operators currently
targeting British consumers are subject to established and effective regulatory
regimes, not all operators are. The Gambling Commission is aware of new and
emerging European jurisdictions where online gambling sites have begun
targeting British consumers and where very little is known about the level of
regulation and consumer protection. This is concerning and raises the question
as to why European operators without sufficient regulatory oversight should
have the automatic right, as is currently the case, to advertise in Britain.
Even where operators are subject to appropriate levels of regulation overseas,
there are different regulatory standards and approaches. There is limited
consensus in areas such as standards and software testing which inevitably
means that British consumers may experience varying levels of protection
depending upon which operator they deal with.
Furthermore without specific requirements imposed by overseas jurisdictions,
operators may not be compelled to report certain information, e.g. instances of
suspicious betting activity, to the Gambling Commission or relevant sports
bodies, even where such activity may involve British sports and/or British
consumers. As such, there is a potential risk that match fixing and suspicious
betting practices taking place on overseas licensed sites (including those that
that may have an impact on sports events held in the Britain) may not be
notified to the relevant British authorities, thereby placing consumers at risk.
Some operators do share some information with the Gambling Commission in
addition to their home regulator on a voluntary basis. However, this is often of
insufficient detail to be used in an investigation and limits the Gambling
Commission’s ability to conduct thorough investigations. There have been
instances where the Gambling Commission has not received relevant
information and has been unable to obtain the information from the overseas

15

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

licensed operator or regulator. In some cases, the Gambling Commission is
told the refusal to provide information is because of overseas data protection
requirements.
There is currently no way to ensure that the protections of the gambling
regulatory framework, in particular those afforded by licence condition 15 on
reporting suspicious betting activity, are applied on a consistent basis to all
operators who transact with British consumers or allow bets on British events.
With technological advancements, it is becoming increasingly difficult to identify
the level of regulatory oversight of gambling service provision and key
equipment where regimes, like our own, permit operators to locate equipment
in different jurisdictions. Many operators have different products licensed in
different jurisdictions, but a consumer can access those products from the
same branded homepage, often without knowing that they can be inadvertently
gambling with an operator that is not licensed by the Gambling Commission.
That can lead to confusion for consumers, evidenced by the enquiries received
by the Gambling Commission about gambling activity that is licensed offshore.
The Gambling Commission has received enquiries about social responsibility
(for example, where consumers have been unable to self-exclude from
websites) and unfairness (for example, where winnings are not paid out or
where complaints have been unsatisfactorily dealt with). However, the
Gambling Commission cannot directly investigate these complaints or enquiries
or follow up to determine whether the issues go on to be resolved, and has to
refer the complainant on to overseas regulators.
Similar problems arise in respect of the carriers of advertisements who can also
sometimes find it difficult to understand where the service or product that they
are being asked to advertise is regulated. This has resulted in some illegal
advertising of foreign gambling and has required regulatory intervention by the
Gambling Commission.

16

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

All operators licensed by the Gambling Commission have to comply with the
conditions set out in LCCP. In particular, all licensees must have in place, and
put into effect, policies and procedures intended to promote socially
responsible gambling. These policies must include a commitment to, and set
out how they will contribute to:
•

research into the prevention and treatment of problem gambling;

•

public education on the risks of gambling and how to gamble safely; and
the identification and treatment of problem gamblers.

17

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

5. Summary of Proposals
Ministers have responsibility for the protection of consumers under the
Gambling Act 2005 and are accountable to Parliament and ultimately the British
public. As such, the Government considers it essential for the Gambling
Commission to have a greater degree of oversight in respect of the gambling
offered into Great Britain. Further, the Government believes strongly that the
costs of such oversight should be met by all service providers rather than
British licensed operators and taxpayers, as is the case now.
To that end, this draft Bill proposes fundamental change to the basis on which
the system of remote gambling is regulated in Britain from the current ‘place of
supply’ basis to a ‘place of consumption’ basis. This will mean the British
consumer becoming the pivot around which the system is based, rather than
the location of the gambling operator (which is becoming increasingly difficult to
identify where regimes, like our own, permit operators to locate equipment in
different jurisdictions).

This will also simplify the system – particularly for

consumers.
The main change will be a requirement for all operators selling into the British
market1 being required to hold a Gambling Commission licence and therefore
subject to the provisions of the Act, its regulations and the Gambling
Commission’s social responsibility and technical standard requirements. It will
also mean a requirement for operators to contribute towards British problem
gambling and regulatory costs2.
The jurisdiction in which the operator (or the supplier of the various processes
requiring licensing - player registration, servers etc.) is regulated will only be
1
2

By which we mean: advertising to/transacting with British consumers
Subject to HM Treasury operators would also contribute to UK gambling tax.

18

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

relevant (and then indirectly i.e. wouldn’t have fees expressed in terms of
country A and B) in terms of determining the fees and charges operators will be
expected to pay and the level of Gambling Commission scrutiny they are
afforded. Operators in well-regulated jurisdictions whose regulators can
provide, for example, the necessary compliance information, will not face
significant increases in licensing costs – those whose regulators cannot provide
such information will need to pay the compliance costs associated with being
subject to the same requirements as other Gambling Commission licensees.
The Government is clear that the proposals are not designed to duplicate the
work of other regulators or to unnecessarily increase burdens imposed on
operators. Rather, the system will be light-touch, avoiding duplication by relying
on the work of other regulators, subject to sufficient on-going assurance of
quality and rigour. This is the approach Britain has consistently adopted in
discussions in Europe and represents the model we hope other European
jurisdictions who are opening up their own gambling markets will adopt.
To ensure the minimum of disruption for operators already active in the British
market, we intend to put in place a period of transition which will see operators
already licensed in EEA countries and the existing white listed jurisdictions
awarded an automatic provisional licence to prevent them having to cease
trading.
The proposed changes will also mean phasing out the British white list, though
operators based in the existing white listed countries will continue to benefit
from the robust regulatory regimes we know are in place and the close
regulatory relationships already in place between the Gambling Commission
and the white listed regulators. In addition to moving away from the white list,
we also intend to allow operators based anywhere in the world to apply for a

19

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

Gambling Commission licence in recognition of the global nature of the
internet3.

3

Operators regulated outside the EEA or white listed countries are currently prohibited from advertising in the UK.

20

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Draft Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) Bill

6. Summary of regulatory impact assessment

A Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) was completed in June 2011 and
considered fit for purpose by the Regulation Policy Committee (RPC). The RIA
details the proposals and alternative options considered.
The proposals are cost- and benefit-neutral to British-based remote gambling
operators, as there will be no additional costs and may even be some (as yet
unquantified) marginal net benefits in relation to fees.
The proposals are within the scope of OIOO and qualify as a regulatory OUT,
with an Equivalent Annual Net Cost to Business of zero, as the direct costs fall
on non-GB-based operators.

1

Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill

A

BILL
TO

Make provision about the licensing and advertising of gambling

B

by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—

1

E IT ENACTED

Licensing of remote gambling
In section 36 of the Gambling Act 2005 (territorial application: provision of
facilities for gambling), for subsection (3) substitute—
“(3)

2

Section 33 applies to the provision of facilities for remote gambling only
if—
(a) at least one piece of remote gambling equipment used in the
provision of the facilities is situated in Great Britain, or
(b) no such equipment is situated in Great Britain but the facilities
are capable of being used there.”

Advertising of foreign gambling
(1)

Section 331 of the Gambling Act 2005 (offence of advertising foreign gambling)
is repealed.

(2)

In consequence of the provision made by subsection (1)—
(a) omit the following provisions—
(i) section 332(3),
(ii) section 333(3), and
(iii) section 361(1)(b) (but not the “and” at the end), and
(b) in section 333(4), for “(1)(a), (2)(a) and (3)” substitute “(1)(a) and (2)(a)”.

3

5

10

15

Advertising of gambling by way of remote communication
(1)

Section 333 of the Gambling Act 2005 (territorial application: remote
advertising) is amended as follows.

(2)

In subsection (2) omit paragraph (b) (but not the “and” at the end).

20

2

Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill

(3)

4

For subsection (9)(b) substitute—
“(b) in the case of remote gambling, that—
(i) at least one piece of remote gambling equipment to be
used in providing facilities for the gambling is or will be
situated in Great Britain, or
(ii) no such equipment is or will be situated in Great Britain,
but the facilities are or will be capable of being used
there.”

5

Short title, commencement and extent
(1)

This Act may be cited as the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Act 2013.

(2)

This section comes into force on the day on which this Act is passed.

(3)

The remaining provisions of this Act come into force on such day as the
Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument appoint (and
different days may be appointed for different purposes).

(4)

The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument make such
transitory, transitional or saving provision as the Secretary of State considers
necessary or appropriate in connection with the commencement of any
provision made by this Act.

(5)

This Act extends to England and Wales and Scotland.

(6)

Section 2(1) and this section extend also to Northern Ireland.

10

15

20

These notes refer to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill as published in draft for
pre-legislative scrutiny on 3 December 2012

GAMBLING (LICENSING AND ADVERTISING)
BILL
——————————

EXPLANATORY NOTES

INTRODUCTION
1.

These explanatory notes relate to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill
which was published in draft on 3 December 2012. They have been prepared by the
Department for Culture, Media and Sport in order to assist the reader of the Bill and to
help inform debate upon it. They do not form part of the Bill and have not been
endorsed by Parliament.

2.

The notes need to be read in conjunction with the Bill. They are not, and are not
meant to be, a comprehensive description of the Bill. So where a clause or part of a
clause does not seem to require any explanation or comment, none is given.
SUMMARY

3.

The Bill seeks to amend the Gambling Act 2005 (“the 2005 Act”). Its purpose is to
extend the scope of the regulatory regime currently governing remote gambling.
BACKGROUND

4.

The 2005 Act introduced a new regulatory regime to govern the provision of all
gambling in Great Britain, other than the National Lottery and spread betting, and
introduced a unified regulator for gambling, the Gambling Commission (“the
Commission”). The 2005 Act's basic approach to the regulation of gambling is that,
absent certain express exceptions, a person who provides facilities for gambling
without holding an operating licence issued by the Commission commits an offence
under section 33 of the Act.

5.

The 2005 Act also introduced the concept of ‘remote gambling’ and brought this
within the regulatory framework for the first time. Remote gambling is defined as
gambling in which persons participate by the use of ‘remote communication’, being
communication using the internet; telephone; television; radio; or any other kind of
electronic or other technology for facilitating communication.

23

These notes refer to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill as published in draft for
pre-legislative scrutiny on 3 December 2012

6.

The territorial reach of section 33 is governed by section 36 of the 2005 Act which
makes different provision in respect of remote and ‘non-remote’ gambling. In the case
of remote gambling, the 2005 Act requires that an operating licence is required for the
provision of facilities for remote gambling if (but only if) at least one piece of ‘remote
gambling equipment’1 used in the provision of those facilities is located in Great
Britain. This has meant that remote gambling operators who transact with UK
customers can escape the regulatory supervision of the Commission by locating all
their remote gambling equipment offshore.

7.

The 2005 Act also regulates advertising of gambling services in Great Britain. Section
328 empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations controlling the advertising
of gambling. To date no such regulations have been made and gambling advertising is
in practice controlled through a provision in the Code of Practice which the
Commission has issued under section 24 of the 2005 Act and which requires licensed
operators to comply, as appropriate, with the Broadcast Committee of Advertising
Practice and the Committee of Advertising Practice codes issued under the auspices of
the Advertising Standards Authority and with the gambling industry's own Gambling
Industry Code for Socially Responsible Advertising.

8.

There are two general advertising offences: First, section 330 makes it an offence to
advertise unlawful gambling. For these purposes, advertised gambling is unlawful if
in order for the gambling to take place as advertised without the commission of an
offence under the 2005 Act it would be necessary to rely on a licence notice, permit,
registration or exception under the 2005 Act. The offence covers advertising of
unlawful gambling by remote means.

9.

Second, section 331 of the 2005 Act makes it an offence to advertise foreign
gambling. “Foreign gambling” is gambling which either physically takes place in a
non-EEA state2 (e g a casino in Australia), or gambling by remote means which is not
regulated by the gambling law of any EEA state. For the purposes of this section,
Gibraltar is treated as if it is an EEA state, which will allow gambling operators based
in Gibraltar to advertise their services in the United Kingdom. The offence covers
advertising of gambling whether the advertising takes place by remote or non-remote
means, and sections 332 and 333 make specific provision about this. This section
extends to Northern Ireland.

1

“Remote gambling equipment” is defined as electronic or other equipment used by or on behalf of a
person providing facilities for remote gambling— (a) to store information relating to a person's
participation in the gambling, (b) to present, to persons who are participating or may participate in the
gambling, a virtual game, virtual race or other virtual event or process by reference to which the
gambling is conducted, (c) to determine all or part of a result or of the effect of a result, or (d) to store
information relating to a result.
2
EEA State is defined as a State which is a contracting party to the Agreement in the European
Economic Area signed at Oporto on 2nd May 1992.

24

These notes refer to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill as published in draft for
pre-legislative scrutiny on 3 December 2012

10.

Sub-section 331(4) of the 2005 Act also confers a power on the Secretary of State to
make regulations specifying countries or places which are to be treated as though they
were EEA states for the purposes of this section. The effect of this is to put any
advertising of gambling taking place in that country or place outside the scope of the
offence. Regulations have been made by the Secretary of State (known as the “White
List”) and they cover the following places: the Isle of Man, the Island of Alderney,
Tasmania, and Antigua and Barbuda3.

11.

With regard to territorial application, section 333 (Territorial application: remote
advertising) provides that, in the case of remote gambling, regulations made under
section 328 and the prohibition against advertising unlawful gambling in section 330
apply where the advertising in question satisfies various tests, one of which at section
330(9)(b) is that, with regard to the gambling to which the advertising relates, at least
one piece of remote gambling equipment to be used in providing facilities for that
gambling is or will be situated in Great Britain.

12.

The Bill will extend the territorial scope of section 33 (offence of providing facilities
for gambling), section 328 (regulations controlling the advertising of gambling by
way of remote communication) and section 330 (advertising unlawful gambling by
way of remote communication). The Bill will also repeal the prohibition in section
331 of the 2005 Act of advertising foreign gambling and thereby abolish the White
List.

13.

Before the Bill is passed, it has to be notified in draft to the European Commission in
accordance with the Technical Standards and Regulations Directive 98/34/EC (as
amended by Directive 98/48/EC) (“the Technical Standards Directive”)4.
TERRITORIAL EXTENT AND APPLICATION

14.

15.

Subsections (5) and (6) of Clause 4 set out the territorial extent of the Bill. It extends
in its entirety to England and Wales and Scotland. Clauses 2 and 4 extend also to
Northern Ireland.
Territorial application: Scotland
The Bill does not contain any provisions falling within the terms of the Sewel
Convention. Because the Sewel Convention provides that Westminster will not
3

Gambling Act 2005 (Advertising of Foreign Gambling) Regulations 2007 (SI 2007/2329)
The Technical Standards Directive requires that, where a member state wishes to impose a technical
regulation (for example by making legislation relating to compulsory requirements for “information
society services” (i.e. services supplied at a distance by electronic means and at the individual request
of a recipient of services)), it must send a draft of the regulation to the European Commission and other
member states and, except in urgent cases, wait for a period of three months before adopting the
regulation. During this time amendments must still be able to be introduced.
4

25

These notes refer to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill as published in draft for
pre-legislative scrutiny on 3 December 2012

normally legislate with regard to devolved matters in Scotland without the consent of
the Scottish Parliament, if there are amendments relating to such matters which trigger
the Convention, the consent of the Scottish Parliament will be sought for them.
16.

17.

Territorial application: Wales
The Bill does not contain any provisions that fall within the legislative competence of
the National Assembly for Wales. It does not affect the functions of Welsh Ministers
and does not make different provisions in relation to England and Wales.
Territorial application: Northern Ireland
Clause 2 repeals section 331 of the Act which extends to Northern Ireland and deals
with the regulation of gambling. The regulation of gambling is a transferred matter for
the purposes of the Northern Ireland Act 1998. Westminster will not normally
legislate with regard to a transferred matter in Northern Ireland without consent of the
Northern Ireland Assembly. Clauses 2 and 4 will therefore require the consent of the
Northern Ireland Assembly by way of a Legislative Consent Motion.
COMMENTARY ON CLAUSES

18.

19.

20.

21.

Clause 1: Licensing of remote gambling
Clause 1 amends section 36 of the 2005 Act (territorial application: provision of
facilities for gambling) by substituting a new sub-section (3). This extends the
territorial application of section 33 of the 2005 Act so that operators providing remote
gambling facilities will require an operating licence if no remote gambling equipment
used in the provision of those facilities is situated in Great Britain but the facilities are
capable of being used here.
So, for example, an offshore-based operator who makes remote gambling facilities
available to customers around the world on the internet will need to obtain an
operating licence from the Commission if such facilities are capable of being used in
Great Britain regardless of whether they are, in fact, so used. If the operator wanted to
avoid having to obtain such a licence, then he would need to block internet access for
customers in Great Britain so that the remote gambling facilities are incapable of
being used here.
Clauses 2: Advertising of foreign gambling
Clause 2 repeals section 331 (offence of advertising foreign gambling) and makes
consequential amendments to certain provisions in the 2005 Act.
Clause 3: Advertising of gambling by way of remote communication
Clause 3 makes amendments to section 333 of the 2005 Act (territorial application:
remote advertising). It repeals section 333(2)(b) thereby removing the requirement
that the prohibition in section 330(1) applies to advertising by way of remote
communication only if the advertising satisfies the additional tests in sub-section (5)
26

These notes refer to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill as published in draft for
pre-legislative scrutiny on 3 December 2012

or (6). The tests in sub-section (5) and (6) relate to the Audiovisual Media Services
Directive 2010/13/EU and the Electronic Commerce Directive 2000/31/EC.
22.

Clause 3 also amends section 333(3) of the 2005 Act by substituting a new subsection
(9)(b) which forms part of the test which determines the territorial application of any
regulations made under section 328 in relation to advertising by way of remote
communication and the offence in section 330(1) of advertising unlawful gambling by
way of remote communication. In line with the amendment made to section 36 of the
2005 Act, the test now requires, in the case of remote gambling, that either at least one
piece of remote gambling equipment to be used in providing facilities for gambling is
or will be situated in Great Britain or no such equipment is or will be situated in Great
Britain but the facilities are or will be capable of being used here.
FINANCIAL EFFECTS OF THE BILL

23.

The Bill will have an Equivalent Annual Net Cost to Business of zero, as the direct
costs fall on non-GB-based operators. There are no additional costs incurred by
Government as associated costs will be recovered via fees.
EFFECTS OF THE BILL ON PUBLIC SERVICE MANPOWER

24.

The Bill is not expected to have any effect on public service manpower. The
Commission is adequately resourced to enforce the extended scope of the regulatory
regime.
SUMMARY OF THE IMPACT ASSESSMENT

25.

The Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) was considered fit for purpose by the
Regulation Policy Committee (RPC). It details the proposals and alternative options
considered.

26.

The proposals are cost and benefit-neutral to British-based remote gambling
operators, as there will be no additional costs and may even be some (as yet unquantified) marginal net benefits in relation to fees.

27.

The proposals are within the scope of One-In-One-Out and qualify as a regulatory
OUT, with an Equivalent Annual Net Cost to Business of zero, as the direct costs fall
on non-GB-based operators.

28.

The Regulatory Impact Assessment and the Equality Impact Assessment can be
obtained from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.
COMPATIBILITY WITH THE EUROPEAN CONVENTION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS
27

These notes refer to the Gambling (Licensing and Advertising) Bill as published in draft for
pre-legislative scrutiny on 3 December 2012

29.

Section 19 of the Human Rights Act 1998 requires the Minister in charge of a Bill to
make a statement about the compatibility of its provisions with the Convention rights
(as defined by section 1 of that Act) before its second reading in each House of
Parliament [Details of statement to be included prior to second reading in each
House].
COMMENCEMENT

30.

Clause 4 will come into force on the day on which it which the Act is passed. The
remaining provisions will come into force on such day as the Secretary of State may
by order made by statutory instrument appoint.

28

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call: 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Houses of Parliament Shop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders: 020 7219 3890/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: shop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.shop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other accredited agents

