Department for Culture, Media and Sport

Memorandum to the Culture, Media
and Sport Select Committee
Post Legislative Assessment of the
London Olympic Games and
Paralympic Games (Amendment) Act
2011

Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Culture,
Media and Sport by Command of Her Majesty
December 2012

CM 8503

£ 6.25

© Crown Copyright 2012
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence,
visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this document should be sent to us at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
This publication is available for download at www.official-documents.gov.uk
This document is also available from our website at www.culture.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101850322
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID P002526304 11 /12 24979 19585
Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

3

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Memorandum to the Culture, Media and
Sport Committee
Post Legislative Assessment of the London
Olympic Games and Paralympic Games
(Amendment) Act 2011

Introduction
1.
This memorandum provides a preliminary assessment of the London Olympic
Games and Paralympic Games (Amendment) Act 2011 and has been prepared by the
Department for Culture, Media and Sport for submission to the Culture, Media and
Sport Select Committee. It has been published as part of the process set out in the
document Post Legislative Scrutiny –The Government’s Approach (Cm 7320).

Summary of the Objectives of the London Olympic Games and
Paralympic Games (Amendment) Act 2011
2.
The London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games (Amendment) Act
2011(“2011 Act”) received Royal Assent on 14 December 2011 and the 2011 Act
came into force on 14 February 2012. The 2011 Act ensured that the provisions made
in the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Act 2006 (“2006 Act”) were
sufficient for the effective staging of the London 2012 Games.

3.

The main measures of the 2011 Act were that it:
•

amended existing powers in the 2006 Act for the management of traffic to
ensure that temporary traffic orders could be made for Games purposes alone;
traffic authorities could implement temporary controls quickly by notice where
necessary or expedient in connection with the 2012 Games; traffic orders and
notices made for Games purposes could be enforced under civil procedures;
and temporary "special event" traffic orders could be used to facilitate the
holding of Games events by imposing traffic restrictions up to and including
road closures.

4

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

•

increased the maximum fine (from £5,000 to £20,000) for the offence under the
2006 Act of selling 2012 Games tickets in a public place or in the course of a
business, other than with the consent of the London Organising Committee of
the Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Limited (LOCOG); and

•

amended provisions relating to regulations about advertising and trading in the
vicinity of 2012 Games events. It provided for articles seized in connection with
contraventions of the regulations to be held and dealt with by the Olympic
Delivery Authority (rather than the police) in accordance with detailed rules
inserted into the 2006 Act by the 2011 Act. It also altered the types of
Parliamentary procedure and public notice required under the 2006 Act for the
regulations (other than the first set of those regulations).

Implementation
4.
The 2011 Act came into force automatically two months after it received Royal
Assent.

Secondary Legislation
5.
There has been no secondary legislation made directly under the 2011 Act.
Secondary legislation as described below (traffic regulation orders and special event
traffic orders) was made under the powers in the 2006 Act as amended by the 2011
Act.

Legal Issues
6.

No legal issues have arisen publicly, either in the court or elsewhere.

Other Reviews
7.
Act.

The Department is not aware of any other assessments or reviews of the 2011

Preliminary Assessment of the 2011 Act
8.
A number of issues emerged in relation to traffic management, ticket touting
and advertising and trading after the 2006 Act came into force. The 2011 Act sought to
remedy these issues. It did not introduce any significant new policies but made a
number of technical amendments designed to ensure that the intentions behind the
2006 Act were given full effect.
9.
DCMS has consulted with the relevant organisations and the overall message
from the Olympic Delivery Authority (ODA) transport team, ODA Advertising and
Trading enforcement team, Department for Transport (DfT) London 2012 team, Home
Office and Metropolitan Police (Operation Podium Team) is that the powers in the
2011 Act were absolutely necessary and very well used.

5

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Traffic Management
10.
The 2011 Act included a number of provisions designed to support an effective
traffic management regime for the Games. It enabled a civil enforcement regime to
operate for the Games by providing local traffic authorities with powers to enforce
moving traffic contraventions on the Olympic Route Network/Paralympic Route
Network (ORN/PRN) and other affected roads, particularly in the vicinity of the Games
venues. These civil enforcement powers were used by Transport for London (TfL) and
other local traffic authorities for the enforcement of Games lanes and other measures
such as banned turns. The threat of civil enforcement by TfL and other local traffic
authorities was therefore a credible deterrent and an important part of the public
messaging in advance of and during the Games to promote compliance by drivers.
The lack of a credible deterrent would have put at risk delivery of the host city
obligations on ORN/PRN journey times for athletes and other members of the Games
Family, as well as other important objectives to keep London and the rest of the UK
moving.
11. In a submission to the Greater London Assembly following the Games, TfL
reported a high level of compliance by drivers: “Following a high-profile three month
communications campaign in advance of the Games, compliance with ORN/PRN
restrictions among regular road users was very high, at around 97 per cent” (source:
London 2012 Games Transport – Performance, Funding and Legacy, TfL September
2012). TfL figures relating to the ORN/PRN in London indicate the majority of noncompliance with the restrictions was addressed by issuing drivers with Warning
Notices (30,400 in total). However, 6,900 Penalty Charge Notices were issued in total.
12. Without the powers in the 2011Act local traffic authorities would have been
unable to enforce moving contraventions. Instead it would have been necessary to rely
on the police’s normal criminal enforcement powers. Given the police’s limited
resources and other priorities there would only have been minimal enforcement of
traffic measures, putting at risk the important objectives described above.
13. The 2011 Act enabled the ODA and traffic authorities to make temporary traffic
regulation orders1 at short notice, and allowed traffic authorities to make temporary
notices for immediate changes to traffic, purely for Games traffic management
purposes. These powers were valuable and worked well. In the few weeks before the
Games they were used in particular by a number of local traffic authorities on behalf of
LOCOG to implement temporary protective measures for local residents around the
Games venues. The powers were also used by TfL and local traffic authorities for
making last minute operational adjustments to traffic management measures during
both Games. It meant that the traffic authorities were able to deal with specific issues
essential to the Games’ success for both those who attended - spectators and Games
1

Traffic regulation orders and notices are the standard legal mechanism to implement traffic
management measures e.g. road closures, bus lanes, parking controls, and turning restrictions.

6

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

Family - and others who went about their normal business. Without the powers in the
2011 Act all the key delivery partners ODA, TfL, LOCOG and local traffic authorities
would have struggled operationally to carry out what was required.
14. The 2011 Act also enabled traffic authorities to make and enforce special event
traffic orders involving traffic restrictions for Games events. It expanded the power in
2006 Act to make such orders for road closures to include other types of restriction
(e.g. no turns). These powers were used for all the road events. The 2011 Act
strengthened local traffic authorities’ ability to do things quickly and for a particular
operational purpose. The ability to make orders for other types of traffic restrictions
beyond just road closures provided traffic authorities with greater operational flexibility
for Games related events. The power to enable civil enforcement of contraventions of
those orders by local traffic authorities acted as a deterrent to ensure compliance.
15. ODA figures for traffic regulation orders making powers indicate that 530 short
notice and special event orders for Games related activities were made using powers
in the 2011 Act.
16. The 2011 Act also included an amendment to the provisions in the Goods
Vehicles (Licensing of Operators) Act 1995 on the variation of the licences of heavy
goods vehicle operators to introduce a temporary simplified procedure for late-notice
applications for such variations. This was in support of TfL’s initiatives to encourage
changes in freight operations during the Games including more night-time deliveries,
which could require relaxation of environmental licence conditions. This was always
only intended as a contingency measure for circumstances where the operator could
not have foreseen the need to apply using the normal procedures. It was only used for
18 applications by road haulage operators during the Games. This reflects the success
of the extensive communication by TfL and the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency
ahead of the Games to encourage timely applications from road haulage operators
using the normal arrangements. Nevertheless the provisions did provide valuable
flexibility for those who had a genuine short notice need.

Sale of tickets
17. The legislation provided a powerful signal of intent to deal seriously with the issue
of unauthorised sales of Olympic tickets. The increased maximum penalty fine level of
£20,000 was regarded as a strong deterrent against the threat of organised criminal
ticket touting activity at the Games. The legislation formed part of the response to this
threat and was regarded as an effective deterrent when used in conjunction with the
other preventative and disruptive actions taken by the police against organised crime
groups involved in ticket touting. Reference to the 2011 Act and the £20,000 penalty
fine also formed a useful part of the Metropolitan Police’s pre-Games communications
with companies involved in the secondary ticket market.

7

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

18. The Metropolitan Police reported that there were about two hundred arrests
nationally (figures to be published at a later date) for the unauthorised selling of tickets
(i.e. offences under section 31 of the 2006 Act) during the Olympics and none during
the Paralympics. This was for two high profile events over 17 days and 10 days,
respectively, with a total of nearly 11 million tickets available and a huge level of
demand from the public. By comparison, for a single high profile premier league game
there could be (depending on the level of policing) circa 30 arrests of ticket touts. In
addition, the Met reported that there was little day to day organised ticket touting
activity at Olympic venues. There are around a thousand known “professionals”
involved in ticket crime (ranging from touts to fraudsters) across the UK. Only a
handful came to the Games and all were arrested. There were no counterfeit tickets
recovered or reported at Games venues.
19. The legislation was unable to support the disruptive or enforcement activities
against overseas based websites or ticket re-sellers. In the instances where
unauthorised selling of tickets took place abroad the Metropolitan Police had to rely on
the cooperation of overseas law enforcement authorities to deal with the organisations
involved. The level of cooperation given by national authorities varied.

Advertising and Trading
20. The 2011 Act gave the responsibility for removing and dealing with articles that
infringed advertising and trading regulations to the ODA (rather than the police) and it
specified detailed rules about how the ODA had to deal with the goods removed by
ODA designated enforcement officers. The legislation provided a number of key
benefits. By enabling the ODA to carry out the function of dealing with removed
articles it freed up police resource to concentrate on other Games related priorities.
The transfer in responsibility also meant the ODA did not have to bear additional costs,
which are normally levied by the police for using their resources to store removed
goods. The 2011 Act simplified the process for dealing with removed goods and
enabled the ODA to make use of existing storage arrangements at local authority
sites. This proved helpful in streamlining the process for dealing with removed goods
as the ODA’s enforcement officers were drawn from local authorities and were familiar
in dealing with advertising and street trading offences and their own local storage
arrangements. This allowed the ODA’s teams to be more efficient in their approach to
the removal and storage of articles contravening the regulations across the different
Games venues and event locations around the country.
21. The ODA reported that their enforcement teams dealt with 896 infringements of
the regulations during the Olympic Games and Paralympic Games. The majority of
infringements were by traders who stopped their activity when informed about the
regulations. There were only 121 incidents where infringing articles were removed by
enforcement officers and these all are now subject to sections 31B and 31D or 31E of
the 2011 Act depending on type of article removed. Section 31A will not be used as

8

Department for Culture, Media and Sport
Select Committee

the ODA is not undertaking any criminal proceedings against any individual or
company and section 31C will not be used as ODA didn’t remove any vehicles.

Conclusion
22.
Based on the feedback from the consultation our initial conclusion is that,
overall the 2011 Act has been successful in ensuring that there were sufficient powers
for the ODA and other partners to deliver the London 2012 Olympic Games and
Paralympic Games.

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call: 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Houses of Parliament Shop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders: 020 7219 3890/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: shop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.shop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other accredited agents

