GOVERNMENT AND MAYOR OF LONDON RESPONSE TO
THE HOUSE OF LORDS SELECT COMMITTEE ON OLYMPIC
AND PARALYMPIC LEGACY REPORT OF SESSION 2013-14:
‘KEEPING THE FLAME ALIVE: THE OLYMPIC AND
PARALYMPIC LEGACY’

Presented to Parliament
by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
February 2014

Cm 8814

£10.75

© Crown copyright 2014
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or e-mail:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
olympiclegacy@cabinet-office.gsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780101881425
Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID 2621530

02/14

36989

19585

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum

GOVERNMENT AND MAYOR OF LONDON RESPONSE TO THE HOUSE OF
LORDS SELECT COMMITTEE ON OLYPMIC AND PARALYMPIC LEGACY
REPORT OF SESSION 2013-14: ‘KEEPING THE FLAME ALIVE: THE OLYMPIC
AND PARALYMPIC LEGACY’
Recommendation 1: We call on the Government urgently to coordinate the work of
producing action plans for individual sports, involving the relevant clubs, governing bodies
and the Home Nations sports councils. These plans are necessary to stimulate enthusiasm and
capture participants for future major events, identifying where possible gaps between likely
supply and demand.
Response:
The Government’s vision for sport in England is already set out in the £1bn Youth and
Community Sport Strategy which is designed to inspire a generation to develop a
sporting habit for life. This strategy sets out how Sport England is investing in a fully
coordinated way in grassroots sport, community sports clubs and through the 46 sports’
National Governing Bodies (NGBs) both to increase sports participation and to identify
and support talent in every sport. This is underpinned by in depth analysis including
around latent demand. Sport England agrees participation targets with each sport
based on this understanding of supply and demand. In addition, UK Sport works
closely with Sport England, the other Home Nation Sports Councils and the English
Institute of Sport, to identify and develop talented athletes and ensure that a coherent
talent pathway exists within sports.
Furthermore, Sport England and UK Sport are already tasked to work more closely
together to ensure that there is a tangible sporting legacy from every major sporting
event. For example, the Rugby Football Union’s ‘Lead Up & Legacy’ plan around the
2015 Rugby World Cup includes an ambition to get 15,000 people playing touch rugby
regularly, working with 6,000 volunteer coaches, and investing up to £10m in
improvements to rugby club facilities.

Recommendation 2: We urge the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and Sport
England jointly to develop a better and more up-to-date methodology, taking full account of
tools such as mobile devices and social media, to capture better the activity levels of younger
people, particularly those under 16 years old.
Response:
Sport England is currently consulting users of its Active People Survey (APS) data on
options for the introduction of mobile phone data collection to the APS survey. This
follows recent pilots which tested the use of mobiles in data collection. The findings
showed that results from mobile collection were consistent with the APS results from
1

landline collection. This suggests that the mobile collection could be included in a future
survey design without leading to inconsistencies with existing data series.
The current consultation is part of an ongoing programme of work that DCMS and
Sport England are undertaking to ensure APS is as robust as possible and provides data
which is accurate and useful in understanding the national and local picture of sports
participation. Since summer 2012 when they consulted on the measurement of sport in
the Active People Survey (APS) and Taking Part (TP) survey, Sport England and
DCMS have:
•

Extended APS data collection to include 14 and 15 year olds

•

Harmonised the sport questions in TP and APS to contribute to a single measure of
sports participation

•

Provided one result for sport participation, reported by APS, with results informed
by face to face collection (undertaken through TP)

The pilots looking at the collection of sports participation data using new modes of data
collection (e.g. mobile phone, mobile phone app, online) were completed in September
2013 and analysis of the data indicates that it should be possible to include mobile phone
data collection in the APS design without putting the consistency of survey results at an
unacceptable level of risk.
The DCMS Taking Part survey leads on child sport participation measurement for
children aged 5-15 years. This is conducted as a face-to-face household survey, so has
complete coverage of the child population. Data from mobile phones, applications or
social media might provide lower cost alternatives but are unlikely to increase the
quality of this survey which already has complete coverage of the child population (and
some of these methods might not be appropriate for younger age-groups).

Recommendation 3: We call on Sport England to make Whole Sports Plans publicly
available, so that the debate on progress on growing participation in each sport can be
informed. We invite the Government to report to Parliament each year on whether these Plans
demonstrate the hoped-for continuing progress.
Response:
Whole Sport Plans (WSPs) contain ambitious participation targets and are a central
feature of how Sport England monitors the performance of individual sports. Sport
England already publishes summaries of each WSP on its website in addition to
publishing the Active People Survey results every six months. This information is made
public to drive accountability for increasing sports participation and stimulate
informative debate on the complex area of sport funding and measurement. Sport
2

England meets with all 46 funded National Governing Bodies of Sport (NGBs) every six
months to review progress against their targets. Sports that fail to meet their agreed
targets risk losing up to 20 per cent of remaining funding after year one.
The Minister for Sport, Tourism and Equalities already reports directly to Parliament
on a quarterly basis on progress being made against the Sports legacy action plan,
including on progress with meeting sports participation targets.

Recommendation 4: We call for investment to be made in primary school teachers and club
coaches, the link between whom is of critical importance, to create a more positive
disposition to sport and physical activity in young people in the UK.
Response:
This government has already committed to increased provision of PE and sport in
primary schools with over £150 million a year for primary school sport for two years
from September 2013 and as announced in the Autumn Statement on 5 December, the
funding will be extended for a further year to 2015/16; this is a substantial investment.
We believe head teachers are best placed to decide how to spend the funding and a
range of advice is available to support decision-making, including on the Department
for Education’s website. Many schools are investing in the professional development of
teachers and supplementing this through engaging high quality local coaches.
The quality of provision offered by external providers and coaches is of paramount
importance and all schools should ensure that any outside provider that they employ is
suitably qualified. Schools can access advice through organisations such as their local
County Sport Partnership (CSP), the Association for PE (afPE), the Youth Sports
Trust, and Sports Coach UK.
Sport England is also investing over £400m into 46 National Governing Bodies (NGBs)
of Sport to deliver their Whole Sport Plans. As part of this investment, NGBs are
required to establish more links between school sport and community sport.
Government’s investment in improving provision in schools through the primary sport
premium is supplemented by the National College for Teaching and Leadership, who
have already developed a new specialist PE primary course for trainee teachers (more
detail at recommendation 7).

Recommendation 5: We call on the Government to require Ofsted to inspect and report on
the time in the school day spent on PE, including ‘out of hours’ sport, in all school
inspections. This would ensure that school leaders take the development of PE seriously and
invest in the professional development of teachers and coaches.

3

Response:
PE and sport should be a central and important part of any school – sporting excellence
and participation, alongside cultural opportunities, go hand in hand with high academic
standards. The funding we are providing to primary schools is ring-fenced to be spent
only on improving PE and sport, so that all pupils develop healthy lifestyles. This has
sent a clear message to head teachers that developing high quality PE and sport should
be seen as a top priority – a real achievement in a time of competing demands on school
time.
Ofsted’s inspection arrangements are a matter for Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector, and
following the introduction of the new primary funding he has strengthened schools
inspection arrangements, requiring Ofsted inspectors to look at schools’ use of the
funding alongside other issues of school leadership of PE and sport. Ofsted’s briefing
for inspectors, which has been provided to schools and is available online, specifically
emphasises the importance of investment in the professional development of teachers
and in extra-curricular activities.
More broadly, earlier this year the Department for Education confirmed that PE
remains a compulsory subject at all four key stages in the new national curriculum – a
strong message that PE is a vital part of pupils’ education. Useful guidance for serving
teachers and new trainees on the new PE programmes of study has been developed by
an external expert group on PE, which has representation from teaching schools,
subject associations and Higher Education institutions. The expert group is also
working with the British Educational Suppliers Association (BESA) and the Publishers
Association to look at new teaching materials being brought to market and how they
will help teachers to teach the new curriculum. This is in addition to the support
already available for professional development activities through organisations such as
the Youth Sports Trust, AfPE and national governing bodies for individual sports.
As part of the £1bn Youth and Community Sport Strategy, Sport England is providing
support to schools to open up their facilities for community use. A pilot with
Birmingham City Council is currently underway which aims to better understand the
barriers hindering use of secondary school sites. An ‘Access to Schools’ project will be
rolled out nationally from the summer 2014, its purpose being to provide support and
investment to those schools wanting to open their facilities to the local community. In
addition, every secondary school in England will be offered the opportunity to have a
community sport club (satellite club) on its site by 2017 – helping to further bridge the
gap between school sport and community sport.

Recommendation 6: In parallel and to the same end, we call on the Government to conduct a
review of initial training for specialist PE teachers so that they can deliver a 21st century
curriculum with the quality of PE teaching which our young people need and deserve.

4

Response:
The National College of Teaching & Leadership (NCTL) is already identifying and
developing routes to produce high quality primary teachers who can teach the PE
curriculum more effectively.
NCTL has already developed a new specialist PE primary course in partnership with
sport governing bodies. Three pilot summer schools training PE specialists began in
summer 2013 and additional trainees commenced training in January 2014. The
findings from this pilot, including on cost and effectiveness, will inform future decisions
that will aim to build a sustainable improvement in primary PE teaching.
Recruitment to secondary PE initial teacher training continues to be buoyant. In 2013,
126% of the target number was enrolled or projected to start in-year. This follows
successive years of over-recruitment. The quality of PE trainees, as measured by degree
class, is also at a record high. The target number for trainees for 2014 has risen, in line
with the importance of PE in the curriculum and the growing demand from schools.

Recommendation 7: As a part of its routine inspections, we call on Ofsted to pay close
attention to primary schools’ use of the Sport Premium, to ensure that schools pool resources
and infrastructure wherever possible.
Response:
As outlined at recommendation five, schools are already being held to account for how
they spend their additional, ring-fenced funding. Ofsted has strengthened the coverage
of PE and sport in the Inspectors’ Handbook so that from September 2013 primary
school inspections will include a focus on schools’ use of the funding. Such assessments
form part of the judgements on ‘leadership and management’ in inspection reports.
Ofsted’s advice to inspectors also includes a suggestion that schools should consider
“pooling funding with other local schools to employ a specialist teacher to train existing
teachers and teach PE across a cluster of schools”.

Recommendation 8: We encourage all governing bodies of sports to consider establishing
athletes’ commissions so that athletes’ voices can be heard.
Response:
UK Sport already invests in an independent organisation, the British Athletes’
Commission, working with them to “ensure that athletes in world class performance
systems train and compete within a fair, supportive and transparent system, which
gives them the best opportunity of reaching their sporting goals, and helps prepare
them for success in life after sport.”

5

Both the British Olympic Association and British Paralympic Association have their
own athletes’ commissions. UK Sport is supportive of any efforts by athletes or by
sports to improve the voice and representation of athletes, either through existing crosssport channels, or within individual sports.

Recommendation 9: For the majority of sports; including the winter Olympic sports, we call
for the no compromise approach to be reviewed with a view to adopting a more flexible
approach which would give more weight to other measures than recent medal success and
forecasts; including support for the performance pathways, improved governance of sport and
the scope for high performance athletes to inspire greater general public participation in the
sport.
Response:
UK Sport’s ‘No Compromise’ philosophy has taken the GB Olympic team from 36th in
the medal table in Atlanta 1996 to 3rd in London in both the Olympic and Paralympic
Games; creating a high performance system admired around the world. We have no
plans to review this approach as we have no wish to give other nations a competitive
advantage over Team GB. “No Compromise” funding for winter sports has created
greater opportunities, as UKS invests on an eight year pathway in sports with credible
medal chances in the next and subsequent games - for winter sports this has meant the
greatest investment ever.
UK Sport publishes a clear set of investment principles which are subject to review in
each Olympic/Paralympic cycle. They are understood and accepted as an objective and
effective approach to managing an investment with high level goals and through
approximately 50 sports and partner organisations. Previous streamlining investments
in sports such as hockey and gymnastics has encouraged them to refocus and prioritise
more effectively - gymnastics funding was reduced in 2004, but secured one medal in
Beijing, then winning four at London 2012.

Recommendation 10: We recommend that consideration be given at the forthcoming review
whether the closer working has delivered the hoped-for increase in coherence, or whether a
full merger is necessary and practical. The review should give genuine consideration, not
simply to whether the two bodies are fulfilling their remits, but whether the current structure
is the possible best way to grow performance pathways from entry level to high performance
sport.
Response:
Sir Keith Mills led a very thorough review of the proposal to combine UK Sport and
Sport England. This highlighted among other things the difficulty of merging a UK

6

wide organisation with an England only body. Furthermore, his review concluded that
we could achieve the project objectives, and more, in different ways. These include:
•

Joint strategic work in key policy areas including developing a shared approach
to talent development, sports governance and coaching;

•

Embedding tangible sports legacy outcomes in every major sporting event hosted
in Britain;

•

Co-location (they will move to a shared office by the summer of 2014); and

•

A shared services strategy delivering real efficiencies and closer working;

The success of this approach will be reviewed as part of our programme of Triennial
reviews.
Specifically in terms of talent development, for the first time ever, UK Sport and Sport
England’s investment strategies announced in December 2012 were aligned. This was
especially relevant for their investment in talent development in England on which they
worked closely together to ensure that all Olympic and Paralympic sports benefitted
from talent development funding.
In addition, UK Sport and Sport England have set up a working group to develop an
athlete talent development strategy in England that is truly joined up. This group is
meeting a number of representatives from Olympic and Paralympic sports to discuss
the issues and risks. Discussions are ongoing and UK Sport and Sport England will
continue to report back to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport. We should
not, however, underestimate the challenges. Community sport talent development has
traditionally been bottom up while elite talent development is done on a more top down
approach. Nevertheless, both organisations are committed to developing a more
streamlined performance pathway and, above all, to broaden the talent base in every
funded sport by encouraging more people to take up and stay in sport.

Recommendation 11: We urge the relevant governing bodies and the BOA, the IOC and
FIFA to work towards providing all necessary assurances required to allow the BOA to
continue to field a women’s team at the Olympic Games, to take into account the views of the
footballers and, subject to all the Home Nations Football Associations being satisfied with the
assurances they receive, to field a men’s team in the Under 23 tournament (with three
overage players) that comprises the Olympic Football competition.
Response:
The fielding of GB football teams at future Olympic Games is a matter for the football
authorities and the British Olympic Association.
7

Recommendation 12: The ongoing dispute over the Stadium has been a disappointing
distraction. We urge those concerned to think further on how the two most local football
clubs might work together, including whether any difficulties can be ameliorated through
wider community use of the Stadium, which may include its occasional use by Leyton Orient
FC if appropriate financial arrangements can be agreed.
Response:
We share the Committee’s desire to see community use within the Stadium and the
Legacy Corporation is actively working towards that. The agreement between the
Legacy Corporation and London Borough of Newham includes a commitment to make
the Stadium available for community use for in excess of 250 days a year, including
access to the 400m Community Track and Clubhouse, community mass participation
events and a training and education centre in the Stadium.
The Corporation has also arranged a meeting with Leyton Orient FC to explore their
ambitions for and understanding of potential occasional use of the Stadium.

Recommendation 13: We urge the Government to work with the football authorities and the
Sports Grounds Safety Authority to revise the licensing conditions under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 to ensure appropriate and improved standards of access and facilities for
disabled spectators.
Response:
The Government agrees that disabled people should be provided with appropriate
standards of access to football and other sports grounds, to continue the successes
around accessibility at the London Olympic and Paralympic Games. The Equality Act
2010 requires providers of services to the public, including sports grounds, to make
reasonable adjustments so that disabled people are not placed at a substantial
disadvantage compared to non-disabled people in accessing those services.
The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (“the 1975 Act”) does not provide for a licensing
system for football grounds in England and Wales. Instead, the 1975 Act requires that
safety certificates be issued in relation to designated sports grounds by the relevant local
authority. The 1975 Act also requires that any conditions included in safety certificates
must be necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety at the sports ground,
including any conditions about access and facilities for disabled spectators.
The Sports Grounds Safety Authority (SGSA) oversees how local authorities discharge
these safety certification duties at Premier and Football League Grounds as well as the
international grounds of Wembley and the Millennium Stadium, Cardiff. The SGSA
has produced the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (“the Green Guide”) on behalf of
the Department for Culture, Media and Sport. This contains a number of
recommendations about the management of safety of disabled spectators at sports
8

grounds and though it does not have statutory force, many of the Green Guide’s
recommendations will be given the force of law at individual grounds by their inclusion
in the safety certificate for that ground.
The SGSA is also responsible for operating a licensing system, under the Football
Spectators Act 1989, in relation to the regulation of the spectator viewing
accommodation at Premier and Football League Grounds, Wembley and the
Millennium Stadium, Cardiff. The SGSA may include such conditions as it considers
appropriate, and the Secretary of State has powers to, by order, direct the SGSA to
include a condition imposing requirements about the seating of spectators at the
ground.
However, it is important to note that licences are not required in relation to non-league
football grounds and other sports grounds and conditions in the licences do not apply to
other, non-football, events taking place at those grounds. Therefore, any provisions
requiring certain standards of access and facilities for disabled spectators, through the
licence conditions, would only apply to the Premier League, Football League and
international football grounds, and would not provide for these standards at other
grounds and in relation to other sports or events.
The Sports Grounds Safety Authority works closely with Level Playing Field, which
promotes accessibility for spectators at all sports, and together with other relevant
organisations, including the football authorities, they produced the “Accessible Stadia”
guide. This sets out good practice in the design of facilities to meet the needs of disabled
spectators and other users. It also includes guidance on access audits to identify
features which present barriers to people with disabilities and to develop effective
solutions. Compliance with the guidance in Accessible Stadia is not a mandatory
requirement of a licence issued by the SGSA. It has, however, made an important
contribution towards improving accessibility at football grounds and delivering better
facilities for football spectators with disabilities.
We recognise that more can be done, and we continue to encourage the football and
other sports authorities to work with their clubs to ensure that they meet their
responsibilities through the Equality Act 2010 and improve standards at their grounds.
In doing so, we would also encourage grounds to liaise closely with their local disabled
supporters groups about the facilities and accommodation provided. The SGSA has
also been discussing with Level Playing Field the need to update Accessible Stadia to
ensure that it continues to reflect the Equality Act 2010 and other legislation.
My officials will work with the SGSA and relevant organisations to consider this issue,
including whether further legislative action through licence conditions is an appropriate
way to achieve the desired improvements. However it would be better for football and
other sports grounds to take action in partnership with the representative groups of
disabled spectators to improve accessibility without there being a need for Government
to consider the imposition of further prescriptive licensing requirements.
9

Recommendation 14: We call for the pricing structure at facilities such as the White Water
facilities in Lee Valley Regional Park to be reviewed. As with our recommendations on the
facilities in many independent schools, we see enormous legacy value in utilising these
facilities as hubs for schools and clubs.
Response:
We agree that it is crucially important that facilities used in the Games which are
opened for community use are genuinely available and affordable for use by the local
community.
The committee report specifically mentions the White Water facilities at Lee Valley
Regional Park Authority (LVRPA). The LVRPA’s approach is to balance the
community focus which activities such as schools festivals and prices for canoeing offer
with the commercial focus required to run a world class Olympic legacy venue. It is
important to bear in mind that the venue has certain high cost elements such as the
energy required to pump 13 tonnes of water every second down the Olympic Standard
Competition Course.
The centre has already delivered a significant London 2012 legacy benefit for schools
with the annual staging of the Lee Valley White Water Centre Schools Festival. Three
have been organised, managed and funded by the Authority each year since the centre
opened in April 2011, giving more than 2,000 pupils from every single London borough,
Essex and Hertfordshire the chance to white water raft and take part in paddle sports
for free.
Income raised from commercial initiatives is used to subsidise programmes such as:
•

Kayaking for those aged 8 or above for £5 per hour

•

Canoeing or kayaking on the smaller 160m Legacy Loop for £5 an hour

•

Canoeing or kayaking on the main Olympic Standard Competition Course,
where the London 2012 canoe slalom competition took place, for £10 an hour

The Authority is offering lower prices for white water rafting, where rafts can be
chartered for £30 per head (compared to the standard price of £49 per head, off peak
and £55 per head at peak times) for Fridays and Sundays in March 2014 and offered
this same price on Fridays and during the school holiday period last summer.
Since opening, Lee Valley White Water Centre has attracted over 230,000 visitors, of
whom 56,000 have rafted with 25,000 taking part in canoeing or kayaking activities. It
has become a popular sporting and community asset which has been achieved because
of its inclusive pricing structure.

10

The Authority will continue to monitor its pricing and programming for the venue and
make any necessary changes to ensure that it remains inclusive and reaches out to all
sections of the local and regional community.
The London Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC) has a similar approach to
pricing for its legacy venues. Its approach to pricing has the following overall
philosophy and aims:
•

Based on the average 6 'Growth Borough' price to create a membership and
pricing structure that encourages more people to get more active more often
through affordable membership structures and pricing mechanisms

•

To encourage wider participation and engage hard to reach groups by creating a
concessionary membership for key target groups within the 6 'Growth
Boroughs' that enables affordable access routes for sport, leisure, fitness and
health

•

To create a reduced price scheme for senior citizens and juniors living within the
6 'Growth Boroughs' to lower financial barriers to participation

•

To create a discount pay and play membership for 6 'Growth Borough' residents
to encourage and ease community bookings, use and charges

•

To maximise and encourage use at off peak times through discounted pricing

•

To utilise the knowledge and experience of Greenwich Leisure Ltd (GLL, the
Corporation’s management partner for the Aquatics Centre and Copper Box),
which has been operating membership schemes for many years.

Recommendation 15: We call on the Government to publish figures setting out the true net
benefit of hosting the Olympic and Paralympic Games
Response:
In July 2013 the Department for Culture, Media and Sport published an independent
meta evaluation of the impacts and legacy of the Games carried out by a consortium led
by Grant Thornton, including economic modelling carried out by Oxford Economics.
The modelling estimates that the Games will in total generate between £28bn and £41bn
of Gross Value Added for the UK by 2020. This includes the impact of the Public Sector
Funding Package, LOCOG’s staging spend, tourism during the Games, trade and
inward investment secured because of the Games and catalysed investments in East
London such as Westfield. This is a robust and independent estimate of the impact
which uses a series of conservative assumptions and presents the figures as a range to
acknowledge uncertainties about how future impacts will arise.

11

On the specific question of investment being brought forward rather than being
completely additional this has been accounted for in the modelling. The wider private
developments in East London which were included have all been treated as being
accelerated by 5 years and the impacts modelled accordingly. It is only the
infrastructure funded directly through the Public Sector Funding Package and the long
term development of those assets (such as the Park facilities/accommodation and
iCITY) which are modelled as wholly additional.
The government will continue to monitor the impact of the Games’ legacy, including the
economic legacy, but there are no plans to commission further modelling of the total
impact of the Games.

Recommendation 16: We urge all partners involved in delivering the legacy in East London
to maintain the long-term commitment required to deliver positive change. We recommend
that the office of the Mayor should produce an annual report setting out the extent to which
partners are making progress in delivering the legacy for East London. This should be
received and debated by the London Assembly.
Response:
The Mayor is working with the Legacy Corporation, the ‘Growth Boroughs’ (Barking
& Dagenham, Greenwich, Hackney, Newham, Tower Hamlets and Waltham Forest),
government and other partners to deliver sustainable economic, social, physical and
environmental change in East London reflecting his conviction that this is 'London's
most important regeneration project for the next 25 years'. The Mayor, in his London
Plan, and the ‘Growth Boroughs’ have committed themselves to the long-term ambition
of Convergence for the whole of East London to achieve a step change in the life chances
of residents over a 20 year period. As a first phase in this process they have developed a
Convergence Action Plan which tracks changes across 22 socio-economic indicators.
The Mayor and the ‘Growth Boroughs’ have recently published the third Convergence
Annual Report for 2012-13, which shows that of the indicators for which the latest
information is available, 6 indicators have achieved their mid-term (2014/15) targets
two years early: Pupils achieving 5 GCSE grades A*- C; Percentage of working age
population with no qualifications; Male and female life expectancy; Children achieving
a good level of development at age 5; Violent crime levels; and Additional housing units,
and the Convergence gap between the ‘Growth Boroughs’ and the London average has
reduced for most indicators. Further information on the 2012-13 Convergence Annual
Report can be found at:
http://static.squarespace.com/static/50b4ab77e4b0214dc1f631e9/t/5278cc9fe4b07cdbb00
37e55/1383648415453/Convergence%20Annual%20Report%2012-13%20Final.pdf

12

The GLA Group and the ‘Growth Boroughs’ are developing an outline programme of
interventions designed to support residents into sustainable work; help improve their
skills and enable them to access training and better paid work; enable young East
Londoners to raise their awareness about future opportunities in growth sectors; and
ensure a supply of tailored, affordable workspace and business support to stimulate
small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) development, alongside tactical physical and
soft infrastructure interventions at key sites across East London to unlock opportunities
for innovation, jobs, homes and growth.
At the request of the Mayor, and with the support of government, the Legacy
Corporation is refining its legacy vision and rebalancing its development plans for the
Park to have a greater focus on employment uses, development of the digital and
knowledge economy, and major cultural and visitor attractions. This will have the
potential to increase the number of jobs created in East London, trigger business
growth, attract inward investment, and help to support convergence and economic
growth in East London, whilst also boosting the UK economy.
The Mayor accepts the recommendation to provide an annual progress update on the
delivering of the legacy in East London for discussion by the London Assembly. This
will be done as part of the Mayor’s Annual Report.

Recommendation 17: We recommend that Get Living London continue to monitor levels of
local interest in private housing within the development, and should be prepared to report
how much of this interest develops into long-term occupation.
Response:
Get Living London are the private company responsible for marketing the private
rented element of East Village, and will be responding separately on this
recommendation.

Recommendation 18: We recommend that Triathlon Homes, GLL and, where appropriate, the
LLDC, monitor how this mix of tenures works when fully occupied, how this might evolve
over time, and develop robust plans for overcoming any identified challenges. We
recommend that the office of the Mayor, and the London Borough of Newham, should
consider how well the village is working when fully occupied.
Response:
The Legacy Corporation has good working relationships with Get Living London and
Triathlon Homes and will seek to learn from any lessons they may have for creating
effective and sustainable mixed communities.
13

Recommendation 19: We recommend that the LLDC undertake a robust assessment of the
level of such need within the area, and use this to require developers to make appropriate
provision when bringing forward new housing within the Park. It is important that new
housing reflects the needs of local people.
Response:
The Legacy Communities Scheme (LCS) is the Legacy Corporation’s proposal for the
new neighbourhoods in Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park and was granted outline
planning permission in September 2012. The LCS was developed in consultation with
the Local Planning Authority, the 'Growth Boroughs', local communities and other
stakeholders. The LCS aims to deliver as much affordable housing as is possible taking
into account factors like the local and regional housing need and the desire to create
mixed and balanced communities containing a variety of properties, tenures and sizes
including family housing. The LCS sets a minimum requirement of 20% affordable
housing with a target of achieving 35% dependant on scheme viability. In addition the
Legacy Corporation will continue to work with the GLA, East London Housing
Partnership and the 'Growth Boroughs' to ensure that affordable housing nominations
meet local and London-wide housing needs.

Recommendation 20: We recommend that the LLDC and development partners should
consider what further steps they could take to promote sustainability on the site and should
seek to promote the highest possible standards in security and in efficient, viable, sustainable
design and construction. The LLDC should seek to retain, wherever possible, the feel-good
factor of naming roads, buildings and facilities with an association of the 2012 Olympic and
Paralympic Games in mind.
Response:
The Legacy Corporation’s sustainability policy sets ambitious plans for Queen
Elizabeth Olympic Park in response to environmental challenges. A copy of this policy
was sent to the Committee with the follow up letter from the Legacy Corporation after
their appearance in front of the Committee.
The policy sets out how the Park will be a pioneer of sustainability: setting the standard
for other large scale regeneration projects, committing the Legacy Corporation to zero
carbon residential development across all of its homes through onsite and offsite
measures, working towards zero waste to landfill and the investigation of innovative
approaches to reducing potable water use amongst other initiatives.
The first phase of development on Chobham Manor will go far in excess of what is
required as standard practice currently, reducing carbon emissions associated with
residential development by 67% more than is required by building regulations. The
LLDC will then offset the remaining carbon emissions – 33% by implementing carbon
reduction measures outside of the development for the benefit of existing communities.
14

This is in addition to achieving a water efficiency design standard of 90 litres per
person, per day, as against the current target of 105 litres per person per day required
by the London Plan.
The Legacy Corporation is also working to promote sustainable lifestyles for residents
through a sitewide strategy for the reduction of energy use when the new
neighbourhoods are occupied.
Neighbourhoods will be integrated with a network of cycle paths and green spaces to
make recreational space available and bring biodiversity to the doorstep of residents
and local communities. Healthy living will be promoted through incentives such as a
residents’ membership card scheme, which is currently under consideration.
All of the Corporation’s architectural and public realm projects meet secure by design
standards.
Venues and parklands will continue to capture the spirit of 2012 through additions such
as the Agitos in the north of the Park. The Olympic Rings will return to the Park and
‘Art in the Park’ that was present at Games time will remain, such as the iconic ‘RUN’
sign outside Copper Box Arena. Venues will retain the names that were used during the
Games, such as Copper Box Arena and London Aquatics Centre. These contributions
will reflect both the impact and legacy of the Games and remind people of the
impressive creative heritage that continues to characterise this place.
The Athletes’ Village, now East Village, has already made reference to the Games
through many of their road names.

Recommendation 21: The Olympic Park will eventually house over 10,000 new households.
These residents will be living close to major sporting and leisure facilities and an emerging
commercial and business centre. This is a new community, with no collective history. The
LLDC should consider the long-term sustainability, security and cohesion of the community
that they are creating to be amongst their highest priorities; ultimate responsibility for this lies
with the office of the Mayor.
Response:
The Legacy Corporation will work closely with the developer and affordable housing
provider on each of the new neighbourhoods to be built on the Park to help support the
emerging communities. Community facilities will be provided on each development and
the Legacy Corporation is also in discussion with venue operators on the Park to
develop a Park membership scheme offering discounts to Park residents. This activity
will complement the additional work to encourage sustainable living such as building
cycle paths and creating car-free areas. This will build on the impact for these
communities of the thousands of jobs created on the Park. Through the Corporation’s
facilities and estates management contract there will not only be a physical security
15

presence, but also CCTV helping achieve a safe environment for visitors and residents
alike.

Recommendation 22: The Mayor, in the annual report specified in Recommendation 16,
should make clear the steps that are being taken to deliver supporting infrastructure within the
Olympic Park. This social and community infrastructure should be capable of being sustained
beyond the eventual winding-down of the LLDC itself.
Response:
The Legacy Corporation will work closely with the GLA and future successor bodies to
ensure that the social and community infrastructure in place is well supported after the
Legacy Corporation’s closure.

Recommendation 23: Developments within and around the Park will generate new job
opportunities. We recommend that the LLDC, employers and the host boroughs do more to
communicate the availability of these opportunities to local residents. These bodies should
develop a coordinated programme through which employment opportunities at the venues
within the Park are made available to local residents, with clear and targeted communications
to support local employment.
Response:
The Legacy Corporation already works very closely with local jobs brokerages and Job
Centre Plus to ensure local residents are aware of job opportunities on the Park. The
Legacy Corporation also provides funding to local authorities for brokerage support
and for their residents to develop the skills and experience to take advantage of local job
opportunities. The Legacy Corporation organised recruitment events in 2013 for GLL
on Copper Box Arena, for BAM Nuttall, who are a contractor in the post-Games
construction phase, and a ‘Meet The Apprentice’ event for all contractors where job
vacancies were identified with contractors.
For Copper Box Arena this resulted in over 90% of the available jobs going to local
people, BAM’s workforce has consistently exceeded 40% on site and they had the
highest number of apprentices on a single site in London in 2013, 95% of whom are
local. This model has been replicated for other contractors on site, including Balfour
Beatty Workplace and The Camden Society. That work will intensify as schemes like
the iCITY business district develop over the next few years.

16

Recommendation 24: We recommend that the Mayor, the GLA, employers and the host
boroughs work together to develop and invest in a construction skills programme through
which a coordinated approach can be taken to making skilled staff available for the wide
range of major development sites across the host boroughs.
Response:
GLA officers are currently working to develop a construction employment and skills
programme focusing on the GLA’s Opportunity Areas and major development sites, of
which a very high proportion are in the ‘Growth Boroughs’. LLDC officers are being
consulted on the most appropriate design and targets for the programme, to ensure that
future activity builds on their good practice.
The Legacy Corporation’s model for delivering employment and skills benefits is
demand-led so the model the Corporation has in place involves working with
construction contractors, their supply chains and the venue operators to identify their
workforce requirements before works commence on site. The Corporation then works
closely with local employment and skills infrastructure and education providers to
ensure there is an understanding of the skills required by potential future employers.
This work has been embedded throughout ‘Transformation’ (the construction phase
following the Games to clear, connect and complete work in Queen Elizabeth Olympic
Park ready for re-opening, through construction work on venues and infrastructure as
well as improving connectivity to the surrounding areas), in Taylor Wimpey’s approach
on Chobham Manor, by the lead contractors on the Stadium and will continue to be
rolled out in subsequent construction phases of work on the Park.
Through its Construction Operations Group, chaired by the Legacy Corporation, local
authorities, the GLA, JCP and other key employment and skills providers are brought
together to share workforce information, good practice and discuss the strategic
commissioning and provision of services.
The Legacy Corporation is also supporting the development of two University Technical
Colleges in East London, one specialising in Modern Methods of Construction and
Business Information Modelling, the other in Design and Engineering, that will provide
vocational pathways into construction and built environment employment for 14-19
year olds in the area.

Recommendation 25: We recommend that the Mayor, local authorities, educational
institutions and employers work together to provide a coordinated response to meeting skills
shortages in this area.
Response:
GLA and LLDC officers have a range of activity in train to assess local skills shortages
and help institutions respond appropriately:
17

•

LLDC have commissioned extensive research from Oxford Economics to
establish growth sectors in the Growth Borough area over the next thirty years,
and the likely profile of employment opportunities. This is being rounded out
with more detailed discussion with employers as they arrive in the QEOP and
surrounding areas.

•

This information is being shared with the Growth Boroughs Unit which is
currently developing a skills strategy for the area – led by a working group of
colleges, HEIs and local authorities.

•

Labour market information will also support the development of new
‘signposting’ activity by LLDC and GLA, working jointly with local schools,
colleges and the National Careers Service. The programme will combine direct
work in local schools to raise aspirations and widen horizons with an enriched
offer through the National Careers Service website focusing on emerging
opportunities in East London and appropriate education and training pathways
to access these opportunities.

•

More widely the London Enterprise Panel are making the case for new Further
Education funding structures which will help make skills provision more
responsive to employer need across London. In the interim the Skills Summit
held at City Hall on Friday 29th November 2013 supported coordination between
skills providers and employers on provision.

The LLDC is a key partner in the Convergence Creating Wealth, Reducing Poverty
group, of which the GLA is also a member, that brings together the six ‘Growth
Boroughs’ in a partnership to deliver programmes and interventions across East
London that will make a contribution to Convergence.
Within the group’s action plan, the LLDC reports on maximising the Olympic
employment legacy and its work with construction and end-use contractors has been
key to this workstream, as has its support for increasing the skills and relevance of
Growth Borough residents’ qualifications, based on its demand-led model.

Recommendation 26: The office of the Mayor should work with local authorities and
education providers to provide an on-going structure for delivering targeted support, aimed at
giving local residents the skills, confidence and aspirations needed to access jobs in those
sectors that are most likely to deliver employment opportunities. These plans should be
developed following consultation with local employers.
Response:

18

As indicated above the Mayor is prioritising a series of interventions that will help both
local skills providers and residents understand areas of emerging employment
opportunity and provide and choose education and training accordingly. The Mayor
believes that it is more appropriate and sustainable to focus limited resources on
helping mainstream provision work as effectively as possible rather than using project
funds to commission freestanding and time-limited interventions.
That notwithstanding, development work is currently underway on two projects which
would help strengthen the skills infrastructure and mainstream education and training
provision in two key growth sectors for East London: the digital economy and health.
Recommendation 27: The Javelin high speed train services were a major success story of the
Games. We support efforts to make these services available to regular users of the London
transport system, through travelcard and oystercard services. We recommend that TfL,
Southeastern trains and, where appropriate, the Department for Transport, work to bring
about this positive change.
Response:
TfL has worked successfully with Southeastern trains and other operators to introduce
Travelcards and Oyster on domestic services operating in the London area. However,
under the terms of the current franchise agreement, High Speed Services are currently
priced as a premium product and excluded from Pay as You Go and Oyster. TfL is in
discussions with South Eastern and the Department for Transport with a view to
facilitating Oyster and contactless bank card payments on the link between St Pancras
International and Stratford international.

Recommendation 28: A substantial public investment has been made into Stratford
International station but there are, as yet, no international services using this station. It is, in
our view, vital that efforts to secure an international service at the station are intensified;
whilst it is not essential that all trains stop there, it is essential that some trains begin to stop there.
We recommend that the Department for Transport take proper ownership of this issue, and
give a higher level of priority to the need to secure a return on the substantial investment
made at Stratford International.
Response:
The Government understands the desire to see international rail passenger services
stopping at Stratford International station. The European Rail Passenger
Liberalisation Directive came into force on 1 January 2010, which allows any European
passenger train operating company access to all European rail networks. This has led to
some interest from train operators in Continental Europe in running passenger services
through the Channel Tunnel onto the UK network. Deutsche Bahn in particular is
19

hoping to introduce services from Frankfurt through the tunnel to London from 2016
onwards. We understand it is their intention to run these services directly to St Pancras.
The question of station stops is a commercial matter for the operator, and one on which
the Government cannot intervene. However, the Government will continue to promote
and encourage potential international operators to use Stratford International.

Recommendation 29: We recommend that the LLDC, TfL and local authorities continue to
work together to enhance access to the west of the Park. Resolving this issue is likely to
require further investment.
Response:
Much work has been done already to enhance access to the west of the Park. White Post
Lane road bridge is already open linking Hackney Wick through to the Park. The newly
opened Wallis Bridge also allows direct pedestrian access from Hackney Wick area to
the Copper Box Arena and beyond to Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park and East Village.
Gainsborough Bridge, for schoolchildren, links the Gainsborough School in Hackney
Wick through to the new playground being built by the Press and Broadcast Centres.
Monier Bridge will link Fish Island with the South of the Park from summer 2014 and
in time that bridge will be improved to become a vehicular bridge.
Alongside these works which are already in train, LLDC is working closely with
London Borough of Tower Hamlets, London Borough of Hackney and TfL to identify
additional connectivity improvements in the Hackney Wick and Fish Island area which
can further improve linkages between the existing and future communities in the wider
area. This scoping work has recently commenced and will inform next steps to take
forward any priority projects identified and agreed with partners.
In addition to this TfL is working with Network Rail on improvements on the West
Anglia lines from Stratford to facilitate enhanced connectivity to the west of the park.

Recommendation 30: We welcome the fact that joint working between transport providers
seen in the run up to the Games is now continuing. We recommend that transport providers
continue to work together to mitigate against disruptions caused by major events and
improvement works.
Response:
Following on from the Games and building on the success of the Travel Demand
Management campaign, a dedicated team has been established to manage TDM activity
across London. This is being supported by joint governance processes agreed with other
operators (including DfT, Highways Agency and the Association of Train Operating
Companies) to ensure coordinated activity from the transport industry and an emerging
20

programme to tackle known challenges. These include crowding and congestion at
particular Underground stations; managing major events; and the help plan for the
widespread effects of the rebuilding works, for example, the current works at London
Bridge rail station, which will last until 2018.
During the Games a transport coordination facility was established to enable joint
working between different organisations to collaboratively react to real time events
efficiently and minimise any disruption. The facility also operated for New Year’s Eve
2012 and during severe weather in the winter of 2012/13. Building on the experience of
the Games, TfL has established a Strategic Co-ordination Unit (SCU), which will ensure
that there is always a co-ordinated strategic overview of ‘business as usual’ operations
and a co-ordinated response to major incidents. The SCU will be responsible for
integrated event planning for all major events in the Capital. As part of this, an Event
Liaison facility has been developed to help support London boroughs, agencies and
event organisers during major planned events ensuring speedy and accurate provision
of information and integrated operations. So far this has successfully been used for the
2013 Virgin London Marathon, Bupa Westminster Mile and Bupa London 10,000
events.

Recommendation 31: The UK is the first country to create a scheme to recognise Olympic
suppliers post-Games, and this is to be welcomed. We believe, however, that further
improvements to the Supplier Recognition Scheme are possible, and recommend that the
Government work with the BOA, and with suppliers, to narrow the range of exclusions from
the scheme.
Response:
As the committee acknowledges, the Supplier Recognition Scheme is a first in the
history of the Olympic movement. It is the first time the IOC has allowed such a
scheme, which enables suppliers to promote their involvement in a Games. The scheme
is great news for the 770+ companies that have been awarded licences as it allows them
to actively promote their role in supplying the Games in business to business
communications, including at trade shows abroad.
The Government agrees that it should continue to work with the BOA and others to
maximise the value of the scheme to British companies and the UK economy. We are
promoting the scheme to UK companies in a number of ways:
•

during UK Trade and Investment’s (UKTI’s) recent Export Week, which has
seen around 5,000 companies taking part in regional events to encourage UK
companies to export and a raft of new deals signed up and down the country.
The week also saw the announcement that the UK has met its four-year target of
£11bn worth of economic benefit from the 2012 Games in just over one year.
21

The UK has benefited from a £11.06bn trade and investment boost through
businesses securing contract wins, additional sales and new foreign investment
•

UKTI are also working with BOA and DCMS and others on plans for further
promotional activity to coincide with the Sochi Games

•

Information advertising the SRS has been sent to all the 160,000+ companies that
have registered on the CompeteFor database

•

Information about the scheme will be included in ‘Winning Global Contracts’,
which is specifically aimed at, and will act as a showcase for, 2012 Games’
suppliers

•

There is a link to the SRS website on the UKTI website.

In addition the BOA has carried out surveys of licensed companies, including of the
value to those companies of the scheme. This data in turn helps BOA and Government
promote the scheme. A survey carried out during 2013 by the BOA of scheme licensees
found that 60% of respondents had won new contracts as a result of the Games and of
these new contracts won 63% could be attributed to the Supplier Recognition Scheme.
Of those companies which had won new contracts over half were valued between £100k
and £10m and the biggest contract, won by a construction firm, was valued at between
£5m and £10m. Further surveys will be carried out to gather information about the
scheme and help promote its value.
The committee raised the issue of exclusions of certain categories of company from the
scheme. There are some excluded categories (non-alcoholic beverages, computer
equipment, IT services, retail food, audio, video and audio-visual equipment) which are
required to protect the ongoing legal rights of worldwide sponsors: CocaCola, Atos,
Dow, GE, McDonalds, Omega, Panasonic, P&G, Samsung and Visa.
There is no scope for changing these categories. They are not dictated by the
Government or the BOA – they relate to contracts between the IOC and major
international companies signed some years ago. However if a company is not sure
whether it falls within an excluded category or there is a grey area they should raise this
direct with the team at the BOA. The BOA can, and does, discuss such cases with the
IOC and in certain instances discussions have ended with the companies concerned
receiving a licence.
We are surprised to hear the committee say that applications to the scheme require
time, resources and administrative capacity that small businesses often do not have.
The application form itself is very simple – the information required by the BOA to
assess an application is basic information that any business would have to hand. In the
October 2013 SRS survey carried out by the BOA, not a single licensee commented on
the application process being complex.
22

Recommendation 32: We recommend that the Government work with major public sector
procurers to make CompeteFor permanently available to SMEs across a wider range of public
sector procurement programmes. The Government should refrain from introducing new
procurement systems into areas of activity where CompeteFor would be suitable for use.
Response:
We recognise that CompeteFor has delivered a positive business legacy for SMEs, and
will review how the service aligns with government’s electronic procurement and
market engagement activities. The CompeteFor model is designed primarily for major
infrastructure and construction projects and we shall explore with Infrastructure UK
and the Government Construction Unit how it could be further expanded into the
projects held in the national infrastructure and construction pipelines.

Recommendation 33: We note that economic benefits which might have arisen from the
Games are disproportionately weighted towards southern England. The scale of difference
goes beyond that which might reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the Games
taking place in and around London. We urge the Government and UKTI to assess the reasons
for this disparity and, in light of this assessment, to revise their plans for promoting postGames investments in regions outside southern England, whilst recognising the importance of
London to the UK economy as a whole.
Response:
UKTI's Investment 'Mission Statement' is: UKTI Investment works to attract and
sustain a high quality pipeline of inward investment to the UK. UKTI’s aims are to
maintain the UK's long-standing position as the top destination for Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) in Europe and become the number one destination for Europe bound
Foreign Direct Investment from emerging markets.
The key activities to address this regionally include:
• Work with the overseas network and delivery partners to increase the number of
high value investments into the UK;
• Showcase the UK's multi-faceted offer to major international investors; and
• Work with departments across Whitehall to ensure the UK is one of the most
attractive places to invest.
Clearly the Olympic Games have provided a unique showcase for the UK as a business
partner and have been instrumental in attracting (as at early December 2013) £2.72bn
of Olympic related investment across the UK. A breakdown of Games related
investments shows there is a wide range of investment projects across the UK which
23

have been landed as a result (according to the investors) of the Olympic and Paralympic
effect. UKTI's latest Investment Report (2012-2013) includes an increase in investment
projects across the UK compared to previous years. Wales and Northern Ireland in
particular achieved significant year on year increases in project numbers, up by 191%
and 41% respectively. In this period UKTI recorded 1,559 investment projects won for
the UK, up by almost 11% year on year and the strongest result in three years. UKTI
played an active role in securing 1,322 projects, almost 85% of the national total.
The national spread of those projects is:
• Scotland - 111 projects
• Northern Ireland - 38 Projects
• England (excluding London) - 759 Projects
• London - 584 Projects
• Wales - 67 Projects
UKTI will continue to build on this excellent basis.

Recommendation 34: We are concerned that more needs to be done to ensure that regions
outside London enjoy a tourism legacy from the Games. We recommend that the Government
and Visit Britain conduct an analysis of how effectively their current major campaigns are
promoting the rest of the UK, and, where required, bring forward changes to ensure that
regions outside London can share more fully in the tourism legacy.
Response:
The Government accepts the recommendation. The Government is already doing good
work to ensure that any legacy benefits extend beyond London, and both VisitBritain’s
and VisitEngland’s campaigns and development work are helping in this. DCMS has
asked VisitBritain to lead on analysis of the impact of the current major campaigns on
tourism in the rest of the UK, and to take any appropriate or necessary action to ensure
that regions outside London are benefiting more fully from these campaigns.

Recommendation 35: We recommend that the Government and UKTI develop an appropriate
strategy to promote the sustainability expertise of the UK event industry.
Response:

24

The UK has the world’s sixth-largest market in low carbon goods and services and the
country’s green know-how was showcased by the sustainable construction and design in
venues such as the Velodrome and by the state-of-the-art biomass boilers used by the
Olympic Park’s Energy Centre.
UKTI's Global Sports Projects Team has worked to promote the sustainability expertise
of UK companies working in the event's industry as part of its wider promotion of UK
capability in supplying global sports projects. Post London 2012 UKTI created 'Great
Britain Delivers', a toolkit of case studies, talking head videos and presentations
highlighting UK business involvement. Sustainability is a key feature of this toolkit with
a talking head video by Dan Epstein, former Head of Sustainability for the Olympic
Delivery Authority, as well as content on sustainability features of the Olympic Park
and venues and the development of ISO 20121 Event Sustainability Standard. This
toolkit has been circulated to posts around the world to help staff tell the business and
sustainability success story of London 2012. UK businesses with expertise in
sustainability are regular participants in events, missions and seminars run by the
Global Sports Projects Team.
With UKTI support, a number of UK firms have built on these green credentials, for
example Atkins, the official engineering design services provider to London 2012.
Atkins remains involved with the Olympic Park legacy transformation and its Games’
legacy is further carried forward through projects including the master plan for Baku
White City in Azerbaijan – which will act as a catalyst for urban regeneration in one of
the world’s oldest industrial areas – and a new commission to develop guidance for ecolow carbon (ELC) urban planning in China.

Recommendation 36: We recommend that the methods used to recruit and train volunteers
for London 2012 should be applied more widely; the Games provided an impressive example
of what can be done to inspire volunteers. The lessons learned from this process should be
built upon to support future events.
Response:
The volunteering programme of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games was
a huge success and the Government is keen that the voluntary and sport sectors learn
the lessons from this success. Through UK Sport and Sport England, as well as through
projects such as Join In, we are working with National Governing Bodies (NGBs) and
the voluntary sector to ensure that learning is disseminated. To be successful we must
learn the lessons of the Games, particularly around the reward and recognition of
volunteers, which we are embedding from Government through the honours and
awards system and we are encouraging others to do so at a grass roots level. The
Government is working with a range of partners, including Join In, Street Games,
Community Games and Energy clubs, to fulfil its objective of increasing volunteering as
a key objective of the legacy. Join In and Team London hosted the ‘Go Local’ event in
25

July 2013 which bought together the 2012 volunteers and encouraged them to inspire
others to volunteer. Join In also supported over 11,000 events in 2013 which recruited
over 100,000 new volunteers.
The Government will use the legacy to inspire and engage volunteers across the country,
particularly around engaging disabled people in volunteering and encouraging clubs to
welcome disabled participants.
UK Sport has developed a toolkit for engaging National Governing Body Event
Managers which includes a section on volunteering – this was launched in January
2014. Sport England are working on a strategy with NGBs, clubs and all those who
make sport happen to strengthen volunteering in sport at a grassroots level. The
Greater London Authority has also been invited to share best practice from the
successful Team London Ambassadors programme.
Every major sporting event staged since London 2012 has had a volunteering
programme and each one has been heavily oversubscribed. In 2013, for example, British
Rowing received over 1000 applications for 400 posts at the Rowing World Cup hosted
in June 2013. In addition, around 900 ‘Cricketeers’ were successfully recruited as
volunteers for the International Cricket Council’s Champions Trophy tournament, and
the recent Rugby League World Cup was supported by “Team 13”, an 800-strong
volunteer workforce comprised of established rugby league volunteers as well as new
volunteers in each of the host regions.
Team London, the Mayor’s volunteering programme for London, has continued to
build on the volunteering success of the Games. Team London’s approach includes:
•

making volunteering easier and improving its profile: largely through the Team
London website and the associated awareness raising campaign. To date there
have been 80,000 unique users of the Team London website, over 1 million page
views and nearly 20,000 volunteers registered. 530 organisations are signed up
to offer volunteering opportunities on the website.

•

maintaining the volunteering momentum from the Games: As a part of the
legacy of London 2012, Team London continues to support Visitor Welcome and
major events in London. 750 Team London Ambassadors were deployed at 11
locations across London for 45 days over summer 2013. Over 1,600 volunteers
have been recruited to 30 major events in London.

•

using the profile of the Games to inspire a new generation of volunteers. Team
London has partnered with Free The Children UK to deliver the programme
which aims to reach 400 schools in 2013/14, 1,000 in 2014/5, and offer all state
schools in London the opportunity to be involved by 2016. The programme has
been launched and 160 schools are signed up.

26

•

continuing to support impact volunteering projects. This includes projects
funded through the Team London small grants fund which will recruit 2,800
volunteers operating in every borough in London.

Recommendation 37: We ask the Government, in their response to this report, to set out what
the long-term, distinct, legacy benefits of the Cultural Olympiad will be, and to explain how
these will be measured and monitored over time. Whilst some of the events which comprised
the Cultural Olympiad itself were undoubtedly well received, we have seen no evidence to
suggest that there has been any coordinated, properly resourced attempt by Government to
use this potential to deliver a distinct cultural legacy from the Games.
Response:
Arts Council England is responsible for demonstrating leadership and support of the
cultural legacy of the Olympic and Paralympic Games. The 2012 Games gave the Arts
Council an unparalleled opportunity by: providing a national and international
platform to celebrate the contribution and value of artists and cultural organisations;
inspiring the public, especially young people, to take part in arts and cultural activities;
and supporting new and innovative partnership working across art forms, in unusual
venues and across the live and digital arena.
Specific Arts Council investment in this legacy programmes totals nearly £60m. The
Arts Council will measure and monitor progress at the national level through the
“Taking Part Survey” and through the evaluation of specific programmes.
The Arts Council has been investing in ‘national monuments’ that celebrate our
creativity and cultural achievements in the same way that the Cultural Olympiad did.
Projects that the Arts Council are supporting include: the UK City of Culture 2013 and
2017; the Centenary of Benjamin Britten’s birth; the Tour de France in Yorkshire
2014; and our commemorations of the centenary of World War One, where we are
delivering a cultural programme, building on the success of the Cultural Olympiad.
The Arts Council approach focuses on the findings from the evaluation of the Cultural
Olympiad: “Reflections on the Cultural Olympiad and London 2012
Festival/Evaluation Executive Summary by Dr Beatriz Garcia”1. The Arts Council is
targeting legacy benefits in:
(i) raising the bar in cultural programming, including the scale and diversity of the art
supported, for example, amongst Deaf and disabled artists and children and young
people;

27

(ii) engaging audiences and communities, which includes supporting national moments,
focusing on East London and investing in skills and employment in the creative and
cultural sectors;
(iii) developing tourism and exchange, working in partnership with Visit England and
investing in international work; and,
(iv) developing new partnerships for example, with the BBC, the British Film Institute
and the British Council.
Examples of specific programmes supported by Arts Council England include:
Unlimited II: building on the success of the Unlimited programme that took place
during the Cultural Olympiad, placing Deaf and disabled artists at the heart of artistic
commissions, Unlimited II (delivered by national delivery partners Shape and
Artsadmin) will provide support to Deaf and disabled artists through a programme of
commissions and run a complementary mentoring programme between 2013 and 2016.
The Space: leading the next phase of the live, free, and on-demand service which: allows
audiences to access a wide range of arts digitally; builds digital capacity in the arts;
supports digital creativity and experimentation; and, connects arts organisations with a
wider audience.
Creative Employment Programme: this £15m fund, delivered by the National Skills
Academy, supports up to 6,500 new apprenticeships, pre-apprenticeships and paid
internships (graduate and non-graduate) across the arts and cultural sector, with a
focus on: music, dance, theatre, literature, visual arts, contemporary craft, combined
arts, galleries, circus, carnival arts, museums and libraries.
CREATE: Alongside its significant investment in national portfolio organisations, the
Arts Council has made grants to CREATE London, a legacy programme arising from
the five boroughs’ joint working, and to the Yard in Hackney. On the first anniversary
of the Opening Ceremony of the London 2012 Games, CREATE London, in
partnership with the Barbican and the London Legacy Development Corporation and
supported by a grant of £100,000 from Arts Council England hosted a spectacular event
to celebrate the opening of the first part of Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park.
Partnership with Visit England: the Arts Council is investing £3 million into Cultural
destinations, an initiative which will enable arts and culture organisations to increase
their reach, engagement and resilience by working with the tourism sector. The
programme forms part of the three-year partnership between the Arts Council and
Visit England.
Transform partnership with British Council: UK/Transform is a programme to build
partnerships between UK and Brazilian arts organisations between 2012 and 2016 with
an investment of £1m in partnership with the British Council.

28

The Government is pleased with the strategic approach which the Arts Council has
taken but accepts that more could be done to communicate these co-ordinated and
resourced efforts; and will endeavour to address this over the coming months, so that
the long-term, distinct benefits of the cultural legacy are clear.
In addition to the work of the Arts Council, the Mayor and Government have recently
announced plans for the creation of a major new higher education and cultural district
on Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. The Mayor, Government and the Legacy
Corporation will work together on the ‘Olympicopolis’ project, which would potentially
see two world class institutions – the Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A) and
University College London - build new sites on the Park, focused around culture,
heritage, design, technology, education and research.

Recommendation 38: We recommend that one Government minister, at Secretary of State
level, should be responsible and accountable to Parliament for coordinating delivery of the
legacy. This would provide clear, identifiable, national ownership of the Olympic and
Paralympic legacy.
Response:
The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport is and has always been the Cabinet
Minister responsible and accountable to Parliament for coordinating delivery of the
legacy.
The Government and Mayor of London are working together to deliver a single and
joined up programme of legacy activity. The Government and the Mayor of London are
supported in this by the dedicated team (the Olympic and Paralympic Legacy Unit)
established in the Cabinet Office to provide overall coordination of the legacy
programme as well as support Lord Coe as the Prime Minister’s Legacy Ambassador.
Ministerial and senior official accountability for individual elements of the programme
remains with those departments with delivery responsibility.
The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport is also deputy chair of the Olympic
and Paralympic Legacy Cabinet Committee (OPLCC), which is chaired by the Prime
Minister. Almost all of the main government departments sit on the legacy committee to
reflect the fact that this is an area in which many different departments have an
important role to play. The Mayor of London and Lord Coe as the PM’s Olympic and
Paralympic Legacy Ambassador also attend committee meetings. The House of Lords
Select Committee considered that this committee’s work is ‘shrouded in secrecy’. As
with all Cabinet committees the OPLCC operates in accordance with the normal
working of Cabinet Government and information provided by witnesses to the Select
Committee has been consistent with this and informed by advice from the Cabinet
Secretary.

29

Recommendation 39: We recommend that the Government give responsibility for delivering
the legacy outside London to the designated Minister, with appropriate resources to support
them in this role. The designated Minister should work with the devolved administrations,
where appropriate, to secure on-going cooperation and commitment to delivery of the legacy.
Response:
As at the answer to recommendation 38 above Ministerial and senior official
accountability for individual elements of the programme remains with those
departments with delivery responsibility. However a dedicated team was established in
the Cabinet Office to provide overall coordination of the programme and support Lord
Coe as the Prime Minister’s Legacy Ambassador. It would not be practical or effective
for funding from a number of departments to be brought together under the control of
the lead legacy Minister. Legacy plans are well embedded within departments’
mainstream plans. For example the Government has already made commitments to
continue the same level of funding for elite athletes until Rio in 2016 and UKTI and
Visit Britain have four year targets for the amount of business and tourism they expect
to be able to generate on the back of the Games. Within Government there was never a
separate budget for legacy projects. Departments directed funding to legacy initiatives
when they saw that the Games and their legacy could help deliver departmental
objectives and took decisions using normal value for money criteria.
Many of the departments concerned with legacy delivery have functions which are
devolved. It is for the Devolved Administrations to decide how to make the most of the
Games’ legacy for those functions in line with normal arrangements. Some legacy
initiatives, including the work of UKTI, UK Sport and Join In, are UK-wide, and Lord
Coe as the Prime Minister’s Legacy Ambassador has been supporting the legacy across
the nations with visits over the last year to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. As
an example of the cooperation that does exist UKTI is working closely with the Scottish
Government on using the Commonwealth Games in Scotland next year to profile UK
business capability and investment proposition which builds on the economic legacy
that the London 2012 Games demonstrated was possible in securing from major
sporting events.

Recommendation 40: There is a debate to be had about whether the area for which the LLDC
is responsible should be extended further to promote integration. We recommend that
consideration be given to the optimum extent of the LLDC boundary.
Response:
We would be happy to consider this proposal. The LLDC believes there are other areas
in the vicinity of the Mayoral Development Corporation which would benefit from
social and economic regeneration and promote integration within the wider area. The
LLDC has the necessary skills and expertise to be well-placed to deliver this. Any
30

extension of the boundary would have to be decided by the Mayor of London, and in
consultation with the affected local authorities and partners.

Recommendation 41: Ultimate responsibility for the long-term, over-arching leadership and
ownership for the legacy in East London must fall to the office of the Mayor. We
recommend that this principle is accepted both by national Government, by the Greater
London Authority and by the London Boroughs and that the office of the Mayor is given the
necessary powers and authority to ensure that that legacy is delivered.
Response:
This principle has already been accepted and agreed by the Government, the Mayor of
London and the local boroughs in East London. This approach was formally established
when the Department for Communities and Local Government devolved responsibility
for East London legacy to the office of the Mayor of London in April 2012. At this time
the Localism Act enabled the creation of the first ever Mayoral Development
Corporation, as a consequence of which we are already seeing progress towards a long
term sustainable future for the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, Stratford city and the
wider surrounding area. The Mayor also continues to work closely with the East
London boroughs and is supporting them to deliver, review and monitor the
Convergence strategy and action plan.

31

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call: 0845 7 023474
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Houses of Parliament Shop
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square
London SW1A 2JX
Telephone orders: 020 7219 3890/General enquiries: 020 7219 3890
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866
Email: shop@parliament.uk
Internet: http://www.shop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other accredited agents

