The Centre for Citizenship
The centre for republican democracy

Evidence to the TV Licence Enforcement Review Consultation
April 2015

www.centreforcitizenship.org

Contents
Introduction

1

Free Speech

1

Injury to Civil Liberties

2

Bias and Compelled Speech

3

Equity

3

Reputation

4

Conclusion

5

Comments on Policy Options

6

About the Centre for Citizenship

10

Appendix: Examples of BBC Harassment of Citizens

11

“Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold
opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media
and regardless of frontiers.”
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Introduction
In this submission the Centre for for Citizenship argues against the imposition of criminal
or civil penalties for the watching of television without state permission. We do so for a
number of reasons, principally ones of free speech and fair treatment of citizens.
It is notable and regrettable that the consultation paper makes no mention of the civil
rights aspects of the licence system. An uninformed reader would not be made aware by
reading the paper that the licence is required by law for watching any television broadcast,
not merely the products of the BBC.
The consultation paper suggests that watching television without a licence is a form of
theft. The individual, it is implied, watches BBC broadcasts but evades the payment due.
The paper states in particular that “one consideration in relation to the rate of evasion is
the fairness to those who pay the licence fee in funding services which evaders are also
able to watch”.
It may be true that there is much unlicensed viewing of BBC broadcasts. But it should also
be acknowledged that many citizens do not want to take advantage of the services of the
Corporation, hard as that may be for its many and sometimes influential admirers to
believe. To deny those citizens access to other television services that they do want,
without prior payment to and permission from the BBC, is to extort such payments and to
deny freedom of speech. It is rather as if Morrisons were able to stop citizens shopping at
Sainsbury's, Tesco, or Waitrose stores unless they paid a fee to Morrisons for permission to
do so.
If fairness is to be a consideration in this review, it should consider the fairness of making
those who do not watch the BBC pay for its services anyway, on pain of being barred
from watching any television.
Free Speech
The requirement for a licence to watch television arose through negligence and without
thought for the implications. That is an unfortunate outcome of this country's lack of a
well-defined constitution guaranteeing free speech.
It seems unlikely that the licence system would have been legislated for if there had been
non-state broadcasters when it was introduced. Because there were no such broadcasters
at that time the charge was a charge for the Corporation's services. For that reason it was a
legitimate charge that did not conflict with the right of free speech. When non-state
broadcasts began the licence charge ceased to be legitimate in so far as it prohibited
citizens from watching the broadcasts of others without permission from the state.
To those with the pragmatic point of view often attributed to the British it may have
seemed reasonable to have left the licence system in place for convenience when the
Corporation ceased to be the only TV broadcaster. But it is important that fundamental
principles are upheld if the rights of the citizen are to be respected and respect for state
1

institutions maintained.
To punish a citizen for watching television without a licence is to punish for the exercise of
a basic human right, that of free speech. The BBC is entitled to charge for its own
broadcasts. But it cannot legitimately deny citizens the right to watch TV broadcasts by
others, whether they are provided free of charge or for a fee.
For clarity we should explain that “free speech” is shorthand for freedom of expression.
There is free speech only when there is freedom to hear as well as to speak. If everyone can
say what they believe but all are locked alone in separate rooms they may speak but there
is no freedom of speech. And free speech is also denied when a citizen is compelled to
contribute financially to the propagation of partisan beliefs that she does not share.
It is unimaginable that citizens should require a licence before they might legally read
a newspaper or book, or listen to what another individual has to say to them. Although
totalitarian societies restrict free speech none go that far.
State control of access to all television broadcasts has no more democratic legitimacy than
state control of access to print or word of mouth. The state may legitimately charge for
what the Stationery Office publishes. It may not legitimately charge for or obstruct access
to what Fleet Street publishes.
It is also important in a democracy that the exchange of information should not be
unnecessarily impeded. TV broadcasters play a vital part in providing information and
debate on political issues. The licence impedes access to this by requiring that permission
be bought before citizens may receive information and witness debates broadcast by noncorporation sources, even though those sources require no payment.
A citizen is entitled to resist state-imposed restrictions on free speech. No one should be
penalised for doing so.
Injury to Civil Liberties
The licensing system can be enforced only by injuring the civil liberties of citizens.
Experience of the system in practice indicates that it requires that the Corporation's
enforcers monitor every home and movements between homes, and visit, threaten and
harass citizens. This behaviour can have value for the Corporation only if the state
continues to impose financial penalties on and imprison some citizens who do not pay
Examples of the harassment methods appear in the appendix to this submission.
It has taken the form of threatening billboards. It includes letters threatening an
“investigation” into the citizens behaviour. And others that inform the citizen of her
rights when she appears in court even though the enforcers have no evidence on which to
base court proceedings and no intention of starting them.
The consultation paper states that “Failure to be covered by a TV licence where one is
2

required will result in enforcement activity being carried out by TV Licensing”. That is
misleading. “Enforcement activity” is carried out when there is no licence for a residence,
whether or not a licence is required. The basis the Corporation's enforcers use for such
activity is the lack of a licence regardless of whether a TV is in use and a licence required
by law.
It may be that enforcement activity will stop if the citizen makes a statement or provides
evidence to persuade the enforcers that a TV is not in use. But, of course, in a free society a
citizen should feel no obligation to do so, and is well-advised not to make such a
concession to overbearing state authority..
Bias and Compelled Speech
The BBC adds insult to the injury of the licence fee for citizens who does not share its
beliefs. The Corporation demonstrates political biases. The one that most concerns the
Centre is its bias towards monarchy. There is almost certainly no institution that has done
more to delay the day of our freedom from that evil. However, other citizens and
organisations find other biases equally objectionable.
It is worthy of note that the Director General of the Corporation, Anthony Hall, is a
legislator-for-life and uses a feudal title of supposed superior class status. An organisation
headed by such a person is not one that those who love democracy could be expected to
support.
When the Corporation forces citizens to give it financial support against their will it makes
them a party to the propagation of beliefs they do not share. This is hurtful to citizens
affected, is a denial of the right to equal treatment by the state regardless of beliefs, and
denies citizens their right of free speech. Compelled speech is not free speech.
It is normal and legitimate to refuse to give money to those who work against ones beliefs.
It should be expected therefore that republicans and others affected would resist payment
of the licence charge. It could be argued, indeed, that it is their democratic duty to do so.
To be punished for not buying permission to watch TV is to be punished for standing up
for ones democratic beliefs
Equity
The licence is inequitable in a number of ways.
It should be clear that the money paid for a TV licence is not a payment for the
Corporation's products. It is a payment required of all who watch TV regardless of the
source of the broadcast. There could be no objection to the BBC charging for its services.
But the BBC demands payment from those who do not wish to take advantage of those
services. That makes the “fee” a tax.
This tax is not imposed equitably. All with an income above a prescribed amount must
pay income tax regardless of their use of public services. But the TV tax is collected only
3

from those who watch TV. So, only one set of citizens who do not want the BBC's products
are taxed. That is, those who watch other TV. Those who watch no TV at the time of
broadcast are not taxed.
To be sure, payment of the tax is easily avoided. But that is another cause of inequity.
Those who do pay against their will are likely to be less resourceful citizens or those who
feel less confident in resisting oppressive state authority. Reports as to the economic and
social circumstances of the non-payers who are prosecuted for watching TV without state
permission tend to support this view.
In addition to its political biases the Corporation has defensible ones. As a broadcaster it
must decide what interests and topics to give more attention and time to. That is a quite
reasonable exercise of judgement by any general broadcaster. An example of this is the
many hours given to broadcasting sport that a large number, but not all, viewers may
want to watch. Those who do not much like sport have to subsidise the pleasures of those
who do but may not find their own entertainment subsidised to a similar extent.
If there was no licence but instead a charge for those wanted the Corporation's broadcasts,
those who enjoyed such broadcasts might well choose to spend a relatively large amount
of time and money watching the BBC. Those who preferred to spend their time watching
American drama might turn instead to Channel 4, Channel 5, Sky or Netflix. That would
be fair. All would be spending their money where it bought them what they wanted.
But it is not fair that one citizen should be obliged to go without the entertainment she
wants so that others can have what they want. Payment of the licence fee by one who does
not find what they want on the BBC might require that that person forgo a number of
DVDs, cinema visits, books or a Netflix subscription so that others might watch snooker
tournaments and the state lottery draw at the partial expense of the citizen first
mentioned.
There is no good reason for one citizen's TV watching to be subsidised when another's
book reading is not. It is no more acceptable for a citizen to be required to contribute to the
cost of another citizen watching soccer on TV than it would be to require that the first
citizen buy the other a drink after the match.
The BBC is not providing an essential service such as health care, the protection of
children or defence that would justify a compulsory contribution even when the
individual does not benefit directly. The Corporation is a general broadcaster and its
broadcasts include to a large extent such non-essentials as snooker tournaments, the state
lottery draw and “soaps”. This does not warrant the use of the coercive powers of the state
in a free society.
Reputation
When citizens are penalised for watching TV without state permission from the state the
good name of this country and of its democratic values are undercut. The notion that a
citizen requires permission from the state before watching TV smacks of East Germany in
4

the 1950s or Iran today, where the police search for and remove citizens' satellite dishes.
The patrolling of the streets and rapping on front doors by investigators searching for
criminals who watch TV without permission is alien to the principles of democracy and
human freedom.
Conclusion
None of the options set out in the consultation document is consistent with the principles
of a free and fair democratic society. There should be no penalty for the exercise of a
democratic right.
The BBC should make it's living honestly by charging those who want to take advantage
of what it offers. It should stop extorting money, and should stop harassing and harrying
those who prefer to spend their money and free time elsewhere. Citizens should be as free
to watch TV without a licence as they are to read books. No one should be fined,
imprisoned or otherwise penalised for watching television without permission from the
state.
The Corporation claims to be loved by the British people. Its admirers often claim the
same. But it is afraid to test this claim by charging only those who watch its broadcasts.
We know Netflix and Sky are “loved” because many are willing to pay for them from their
own pockets and without taking from those who do not want to watch.
The BBC should do the same. It should be allowed to take money only from those who
wish to consume what it has to sell. The consultation paper notes that technological
advances may make it possible to disconnect from TV services those who do not have a
licence. However, such technology would also allow those who do not have a licence to be
denied the Corporation's broadcasts while continuing to receive those broadcasts they do
want. That would be fair, would require no denial of human rights, and would test the
Corporation's beliefs as to the high regard in which it is held by the majority of citizens.

5

Comments on Policy Options
Option One
It is unacceptable for nothing to be done. The prosecution of citizens who watch TV
without permission and the harassment of citizens who do not watch TV are violations of
human rights.
Questions 1 – 5: Watching TV without state permission should not be a criminal offence.
The main advantage of the current system is an advantage for the Corporation: it is able to
raise funds from unwilling citizens. The disadvantages are set out at length elsewhere in
this submission. The enforcement system should be abandoned for reasons of civil liberty
and fairness.
The licence may be of poor, average or excellent value for money for those who want the
Corporation's products, depending on the extent to which the Corporation satisfies their
needs. The Netflix charge of £84 a year as against the Corporation's charge of £145 may
give some idea of relative values for some citizens at least.
Certainly for those who do not want the Corporation's products but are obliged to pay its
charge there is a negative value. It is clearly unfair to those who pay under duress. And
also to those who are not required to pay but are subject to the harassment that the
Corporation undertakes to extract money where it can.
The paper gives no evidence of the effectiveness of the fines imposed on those watching
TV without permission. But as the number of homes without a licence seems not to have
been significantly reduced in recent years, their effectiveness may be doubted. We assume
that as the received wisdom is that the Corporation is revered by the majority of the
population, a large majority of those who are licenced to watch TV would pay the charges
for BBC broadcasts even in the absence of penalties for not doing so.
Considerations 2 (b) and (c) of Annexe A would be met by a system, such as that used by
Netflix, that collected fees only from willing payers and did so electronically obviating the
need for the Corporation's large-scale system of monitoring, harassment and prosecution.
Option Two
The suggestion that citizens should be obliged to notify the Corporation for the
convenience of its enforcement agents if they do not require a TV licence should be
unthinkable. Law-abiding citizens do not owes an account of themselves to the state. It is
no more acceptable than would be a requirement to inform the police that one has no
stolen goods at home.
The comparison with the duty to notify the DVLA that one has an untaxed vehicles is
invalid. Only those who own a vehicle but have not taxed it are obliged to make a report
explaining that. The suggestion in this paper is that all who choose not to watch TV
broadcasts should be obliged to report this.
6

Increasing the data sources available to the TV Licencing is hardly more acceptable. The
Corporation does more than enough spying on citizens already.
Citizens who do not have a TV licence should be left unmolested by the BBC and its
enforcers unless there is evidence that they have broken the law. The current assumption
that all those without a licence are fair game for the enforcers should cease to be made. It is
oppressive. To ask this is to ask no more than we expect of the police. There would rightly
be outrage is the police behaved as the Corporation's enforcers do.
In any case such a provision is likely to be ineffective as without evidence for a search
warrant the Corporation would be unable to verify the accuracy of such notices.
Question 6 – 10: The criminal enforcement system for TV licences should be abandoned,
not reformed. It is inimical to democratic rights. Reform will not change that. However, if
the licence system is kept the Corporation should stop the harassment of citizens where it
has no evidence that TV is being watched without state permission other than the absence
of a licence.
Option Three
This option would do nothing to correct the violations of civil rights that the licence
system imposes. We find it unacceptable.
TV Licensing is a business. We believe that its employees are paid bonuses for their
success in raising funds for the Corporation. It is much to be doubted, therefore, that it can
be trusted with responsibilities given to to the Procurator Fiscal in Scotland. The
disgraceful ways in which it behaves currently makes it unfit to deal with out-of-court
settlements.
Questions 11 – 15: Watching TV without state permission should not be a criminal
offence. Out-of -court settlement would do nothing to correct this wrong.
Option Four
There is a clear danger with this option that the BBC and its enforcers would be tempted to
issue penalty notices against those who do not have a licence although lacking in adequate
evidence that one was required or a prosecution warranted. The possibility that the
accused might pay the fixed penalty in order to avoid the trouble, expense and
embarrassment of a court appearance would almost certainly tempt the enforcement
agency to take a chance and issue the penalty notice. It could then decide formally not to
proceed with a court hearing it had never intended to follow-through with in the event
that the citizen decided to contest the penalty.
The fear that this might happen is supported by one trick used currently by the enforcers.
In cases where they have no evidence that a TV licence is required they nonetheless write
to the homeowner to inform her or him of their rights in court. This tactic is clearly
intended to frighten the homeowner into getting a licence. Any changes recommended by
7

this review should not provide an opening for a similar tactic.
Questions 16 – 20: This option also puts the financial interests of the Corporation before
the democratic rights of citizens. There are no advantages for citizens.
Option Five
A statutory requirement that every citizen or every household hold a licence to watch TV
is the worst option and incompatible with either human rights or fairness.
It is not clear how a statutory requirement for a licence to be held would work. We do not
think it can be intended that every citizen have a licence. If the proposal is that every
household have a licence, it is not clear who in the household would have the statutory
duty to obtain the licence and what evidence would be required that the requirement fell
on a particular person.
This proposal would penalise an even larger section of citizens. Currently those who wish
to watch no TV are excused from contributing to the costs of of providing corporation
broadcasts to those who do want its products. Only those who watch non-corporation TV
are compelled to contribute to the production costs of the sports, soaps, quizzes etc. that
they do not want.
The watching of TV without permission is hardly comparable with the wrongs that are
dealt with through civil proceedings. There is no breach of contract. The citizen proceeded
against would not have failed to pay for goods or services purchased. They would have
simply not have paid for what they neither wanted nor purchased.
Most taxes may be avoided or reduced by modifying one's behaviour. But there would be
no escape from the full impact of this regressive tax.
There is some public suspicion that local authorities may use parking restrictions merely
to raise revenue rather than to manage traffic. If this proposal were to be implemented
there would be no doubt that the legal system was being used simply as a money-raising
machine for the benefit of the Corporation.
That would do further harm to the reputation of the Corporation and to public respect for
the law. YouTube videos of bailiffs seizing the property of those who had watched TV
without state permission would certainly undermine the image of the country as a model
of democratic rights.
Questions 21 – 25: Our views are set out above. The key disadvantage of this option is that
citizens would continue to be harassed by the Corporation's enforcers, penalised for
exercising their civil rights, and forced to pay for what they do not want.
Option Six
Here we see a vivid demonstration of the contortions required to defend the indefensible.
8

The paper tells us that the licence fee is not a payment for services. But it suggests that it
should be treated as if it were, making non-payment a civil debt. The paper refers to the
need for “contractual arrangements” to be in place for liability for payment to be
established. But a contract requires the uncoerced agreement of both parties. That would
often not be the case with the TV licence. This would be a debt where the citizen did not
want and had not bought the service from which the liability arose. Legal proceedings in
such cases would certainly undermine respect for contract law.
We ask what standard of proof would be required in order for this “civil debt” to be
enforced.
It is hardly credible that paragraph 6.2 could have been published by a government
department in a democratic state. The paper suggests that the Corporation should be able
to “assume” the length of time that a citizen has not had a licence and collect backpayments for the period assumed. The word “assume” indicates that no evidence would
be required.
It seems that civil rights and legal safeguards count for nothing when it comes to the holy
BBC that all are expected to pay tribute to. This suggestion is utterly shameful.
Questions 26 – 30: The disadvantages are as for option 5.
7. Other Options
Question 31: We can offer no other options for a licence enforcement regime. The licence
should be abolished. If the BBC wishes to continue as a general broadcaster it should
arrange to finance itself by charging those who wish to take advantage of its services. If it
is to become a true public service broadcaster, it should be financed from general taxation.
Fairness Considerations
Questions 32 -34: Our answer to Question 32 is “Yes”. The licence enforcement system
does coerce some of the unwilling into giving financial support to the Corporation. We
believe that the alternatives suggested would also be coercive in effect and in some cases
would be more so.
We believe that it would be wrong if a citizen's credit rating were to be adversely affected
because, in protecting their civil liberty, they refused to pay off the Corporation. There is
no necessary correlation between the refusal to pay for a TV licence and financial status.
April 2015

9

About Us
The Centre for Citizenship is a republican organisation that works to free Britain from
hereditary, religious and class privilege in the governance of our country.

10

Appendix One: BBC Harassment
Examples of BBC enforcement communications where there is no evidence of law
breaking.
1. Letters from TV Licensing.
“This is an official warning that we are carrying out an investigation of your address.
We have asked you to contact us several times but you have not responded. It is a criminal
offence to watch or record television programmes as they are being shown on TV unless
you have a TV licence.”
“This is an official warning that the TV Licensing Enforcement Division will be
proceeding with a full investigation of the above address. This is because there is still no
record of a TV licence at this property.”
“An Enforcement Officer has been scheduled to visit to find out if TV is being
watched or recorded illegally. The Officer my visit your property any day of the week,
morning or evening.”
2. Other TV Licensing Communications
“Your address is unlicensed. I called to find out why.”

Heading on notice left by BBC agents when unable to interview citizens who have not asked for permission
to watch TV.

“Our officers may ask to inspect your licence and television equipment at any time,
but you do not have to let them into your home without a search warrant. We can end or
change your licence at any time by writing to you.”
From the television licence form sent to every household in Britain

3. How the BBC encourages citizens to spy on those who may watch TV without state
permission

11

