Consultation response:
TV Licence Enforcement
Review

Response by the Money Advice Trust
Date: May 2015

Contents
Page 2

Contents

Page 3

Introduction / About the Money Advice Trust

Page 4

Introductory comment

Page 5

Our comments

TV Licence Enforcement Review

2

Introduction
About the Money Advice Trust
The Money Advice Trust is a charity founded in 1991 to help people across the UK tackle
their debts and manage their money wisely.
The Trust’s main activities are giving advice, supporting advisers and improving the UK’s
money and debt environment.
We help approximately 1 million people per annum through our direct advice services and by
supporting advisers through training, tools and information. We give advice to around
200,000 people every year through National Debtline and around 40,000 businesses through
Business Debtline. We support advisers by providing training through Wiseradviser,
innovation and infrastructure grants.
We use the intelligence and insight gained from these activities to improve the UK’s money
and debt environment by contributing to policy developments and public debate around
these issues.

Public disclosure
Please note that we consent to public disclosure of this response.

TV Licence Enforcement Review

3

Introductory comment
We welcome the opportunity to comment on the proposals in the TV licence enforcement
review. It is difficult for us to comment in any detail on the proposals put forward. We do not
have the ability to judge the effects on BBC revenue of adopting specific penalty options or
the effect of reducing the sanctions for non-payment.
We have therefore not attempted to answer the detailed questions posed in the consultation
paper and have limited ourselves to setting out our concerns and making some limited
suggestions which include the following.
•

Remove the power to send anyone to prison for failure to pay the fine. This offence
should effectively be decriminalised.

•

Consider new and alternative payment methods for a TV licence. If someone agrees
to sign up to a formal payment plan then they should not be subject to a further
financial penalty.

•

TV Licensing should do more to assist vulnerable groups and refer people in debt for
debt advice.

•

If the aim is to maximise TV licence income, then we would suggest concentrating on
innovative ideas to obtain payment, rather than the additional burden of a fine or civil
penalty as this just makes the situation worse for many people.

•

Whichever option is selected, people should have the right to make payments in
instalments and a robust appeals mechanism should be put in place.

TV Licence Enforcement Review

4

Our comments
Reform payment methods
We believe that the payment methods available to pay for a TV licence should be reviewed
and reformed to help people to pay more easily. The TV Licensing website states as
follows. 1
“Because every year comes in weekly instalments, you can pay for your TV Licence the
same way. Our payment card spreads the cost with small amounts – you pay for your first
licence over 26 weeks, then you can move to fortnightly payments. You can pay online, at
PayPoint outlets, by phone and by text message, so it’s very convenient, too.”
The way these payments are set up, it means that anyone setting up payments for the first
time has to pay more initially. Payment of a full TV licence over 26 weeks does not
represent a small amount from anyone on benefit level income or who has an already
stretched household budget. At current rates this represents the payment of the full licence
of £145.50 at £5.60 a week. This is not an amount that is affordable and is likely to mean
that payment becomes unsustainable and the arrangement fails.
We believe that these payments should be set at a more affordable level and the costs
should be spread out beyond 26 weeks for the initial licence payment. If the licence costs
are paid over 52 weeks then this is a more affordable £2.80 a week. There may also be
innovative payment arrangements or new methods of payment to consider with the advent of
new technology that will encourage participation and make payment easier. It is not clear
that these options are being fully explored by TV Licensing.
If spreading the cost of the licence and new payment methods reduce the numbers of people
who default on payment then this will save both household stress and costs for that
household. This is alongside a considerable amount of savings on costs for the TV licensing
service in taking enforcement action and enhancing revenues for the service.
We see this approach as being coupled with a proactive obligation on TV licensing to utilise
early intervention techniques to assist those who are struggling to pay. A referral
mechanism to free money advice services where it becomes clear that someone’s inability to
pay for their TV Licence is a symptom of wider debt problems should be put in place. The
TV licence is more likely to be prioritised over other debts and liabilities once a stable
household budget is in place.

1

http://www.tvlicensing.co.uk/pay-for-your-tv-licence/payment-methods/how-would-you-like-to-pay-for-your-tv-licencepay8?WT.ac=home_banner_image

TV Licence Enforcement Review

5

Reform penalties
We would suggest that where it is found that a household has not got a valid TV licence that
they are offered the option of signing up to a formalised payment plan and not face an
additional penalty. We believe that this incentive would work to help people to focus on
having a chance at payment as an alternative to more punitive action. It will also save the
costs and expenses of further enforcement action. We also believe that it is counter intuitive
to ask people who are having difficulty paying their household bills to pay an additional fine
or financial penalty in addition to paying the TV licence which they were finding it difficult to
pay in the first place.
The granting of this option does not prevent further action being taken in the future, or on
breach of the arrangement, but would provide a more equitable, fairer outcome. Ultimately,
the aim must be to ensure the TV licence is paid rather than fines and penalties incurred.
If this approach was to be adopted, then we would envisage safeguards would be built in to
protect participating households from further action where they could demonstrate good
reason for non-payment once they enter into the arrangement.
We recognise that this approach would involve a reform in the law as not having a TV
licence or non-payment could not automatically lead to prosecution as a criminal offence.
This would be substituted by the staged approach suggested.
Furthermore, we are not convinced that it is reasonable for the enforcement regime for nonpayment to remain in the magistrates’ court. We have produced a range of National Debtline
case studies below that demonstrate that enforcement in the magistrates’ court leads to
mistreatment of vulnerable people and can be disproportionately punitive in effect.
Methods of enforcement by TV Licensing could be much more flexible and prevent very real
distress to vulnerable people, as well as costs to the public purse.

The options
The options presented in the paper are as follows.
1 Do nothing: to retain the current criminal enforcement system.
2 Reform of current system: leave the current offence as it stands but reform the
current criminal enforcement system.
3 Out of Court Settlement: retention of the criminal offence, with an option for
disposal by way of an out of court settlement.
4 Fixed monetary penalty: retention of the criminal offence, with an option for
disposal by way of a fixed monetary penalty.
5 Civil monetary penalty: decriminalise and enforce via a civil infraction.
6 Civil debt: decriminalise and enforce as a civil debt.

TV Licence Enforcement Review

6

We do not believe that is appropriate to have the power to send people to prison for the nonpayment of their TV licence. Out of the options provided in the consultation paper, we do not
favour the option of retaining the status quo. We would suggest that reform of the current
criminal enforcement system is urgently needed.
Out of the options provided, we have concerns with all of the approaches, as all of these
options result in an additional penalty, fine or charge being issued. We believe these would
serve to make any existing financial difficulties worse and increase the likelihood that the ongoing TV licence and other debts are not paid.
The least punitive approach would be to adopt option 6, and decriminalise the offence of
non-payment in favour of enforcement as a civil debt in the county court. The county court is
set up to deal with matters relating to the repayment of debt and would enable those who
could not pay, to offer payment in instalments in a more easily accessible manner. The
sanctions in the county court are less draconian and imprisonment is not (normally) the
ultimate sanction for non-payment.
As a further example, private bailiffs were been given extra powers under the Domestic
Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 to force entry into property to enforce a magistrates’
court fine for certain offences. This anomaly was presumably intentionally allowed to remain
following the implementation of new unified bailiff regulations under the Tribunals, Courts
and Enforcement Act in April 2014. This enhanced power further adversely affects
vulnerable clients in debt who are being pursued for non-payment of a fine for not having a
TV licence as bailiffs can legitimately threaten to force entry and seize goods unless
payment is forthcoming.
We would also point out that there are interested parties that would stand to gain from
changes in the enforcement regime for TV licences. All of options 1 to 5 offer further
opportunities for private enforcement companies. If option 5 is modelled upon the
decriminalised parking penalty process, then enforcement may start in the county court, but
is carried out by private rather than county court bailiffs. We do not support the adoption of
this model which seems to us to represent the worst of both worlds. Parking penalty notices
are registered in the county court with court costs added, but then passed to collection by
private bailiff companies. There is no power to apply to suspend enforcement or to pay in
affordable instalments. Whereas debts in the county court are enforced using county court
bailiffs and warrants can be suspended via the mechanism of the N245 application.
We would point out that our comments are purely from the perspective of assisting
vulnerable people in debt who are affected by the punitive nature of the enforcement regime.
We are not in a position to estimate the effects on BBC revenue of adopting specific penalty
options or the effect of reducing the sanctions for non-payment. We assume that arguments
can be put forward to argue that sanctions must be maintained for those who try to avoid the
licence fee and refuse to pay. Perhaps research is needed into whether there would be any
effect on potential non-payment if credit ratings were to be affected by non-payment via
credit reference agencies.
The present regime does not attempt to differentiate or treat the potentially vulnerable fairly.
At the very least, whichever of these options are adopted, a properly constituted requirement
to offer the ability to pay any penalty in affordable instalments should be included. There is
very little opportunity for discretion in current regime. We also would expect to see robust
appeals mechanisms built into any new process.

TV Licence Enforcement Review

7

We would like to see TV Licensing being required to treat vulnerable groups fairly such as
the elderly, sick or disabled, those with mental health problems and so on, and be required
to offer more assistance to these groups. The paper itself identifies that there is a severe
gender imbalance in the proportion of fines imposed with women being twice as likely to be
fined as men.2 There is no current ability to exercise discretion, except perhaps in the level
of fine imposed, where sufficient representations are made to the magistrates’ court. Any
new system must allow for such discretion to be built in.

National Debtline TV licence statistics
We have set out a chart below that illustrates the percentage of callers to National Debtline
over the years 2010 to 2014 who have concerns about non-payment of their TV licence. As
indicated, the percentage of callers with these issues has risen substantially over this period.

Year

Percentage of callers

2010

1.88%

2011

3.32%

2012

4.28%

2013

5.38%

2014

5.26%

The Money Advice Trust produced our “Changing household budgets” report in 2014 3 which
shows that more households are becoming susceptible to serious debt problems. The study
revealed that more people are falling into debt because they can’t afford basic household
bills such as energy bills, water bills, telephone bills, and council tax.
National Debtline has seen a radical shift in the types of debt problems it helps people
resolve. More people than ever before now need help with energy debts, water debts,
telephone debts, council tax debts, and catalogue shopping debts – whilst less people report
problems with traditional credit products such as bank overdrafts, loans and credit cards.
The trend in TV licence problems reflects the findings in our report regarding everyday
household bills, as a TV licence is classed as an essential outgoing in any household
budget. The growth in our clients reporting payment problems with their TV licence means
that more people are at risk of being fined for non-payment of their licence with the
subsequent risk of extremely serious sanctions if the fine is not paid. This is of course, in
addition to the requirement to pay the TV licence. This means that people are required to
pay both the TV licence and the magistrates’ court fine from an already stretched household
budget.
2

Proportion of fines imposed for failure to hold a TV licence in 2012 by gender was 32% male 68% female - table B4a from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-court-statistics-quarterly-july-to-september-2014
3
http://www.infohub.moneyadvicetrust.org/content_files/files/changing_household_budgets_report_final.pdf

TV Licence Enforcement Review

8

National Debtline case studies
We have provided some representative case studies which demonstrate that those who are
affected by the enforcement of magistrates’ court fines for non-payment of TV licences are
the most vulnerable in society, and least able to deal with the situation.

National Debtline case study
The client is in a particularly difficult situation being a divorced pensioner with learning
difficulties on benefit income with rent arrears and fuel debts amongst other debts. Client
struggled to understand the advice we gave and was referred on for specialist help. A TV
licensing agent was very rude when they called out and had told her she will receive a fine
for not having a TV licence. She needed advice on getting a TV licence and arranging
instalment payments.

National Debtline case study
The client had a mental health breakdown and was unable to deal with her finances.
A TV licence agent called and said that as long as she pays her direct debit then there would
be no further action. However, the client still received a magistrates’ court fine and was
unable to cope. The fine has now been passed to bailiffs to recover and they are being very
aggressive.

National Debtline case study
The client did not respond to the magistrates’ court fine because of illness. She has mental
health problems and is currently having help with an application for disabled benefits. The
client has numerous debts including a suspended possession order on her home, alongside
fuel debt and is struggling to cope.

National Debtline case study
A couple on disabled benefits with a baby due shortly and various debts including council tax
and fuel debts contacted us for help. She has bipolar disorder and was very ill when they
failed to pay the TV licence. A bailiff called out threatening them with the police and upset
her daughter as was very aggressive. We advised on putting in a complaint to the court that
the bailiff was very aggressive and wrongly threatened the use of the police.

National Debtline case study
A lone parent with one dependent child on benefit income and with other debts contacted us
for help. Has a hearing for non-payment of magistrates’ court fine in relation to not having a
TV licence. She has not retained any of the paperwork and does not know where the
hearing is. Client is too anxious to attend the hearing without support.

National Debtline case study
A client contacted National Debtline to ask for advice about a bailiff who was being
unpleasant about recovery of a magistrates’ court fine. The client already had a TV licence
and could provide evidence. They had received no letters from the court and were
convinced that the TV licence agent had confused them with the flat below.

TV Licence Enforcement Review

9

National Debtline case study
A single parent on benefit income with 4 dependents received a magistrates’ court fine for
not having a TV licence. The client does not need a TV licence as does not use any devices
that would pick up a signal. However, the client still received a fine. A bailiff has called out,
refused to provide any identification and the client found them to be very loud and
aggressive at the door.

National Debtline case study
The client rang after they had been issued with an arrest warrant for a magistrates’ court fine
for the non-payment of their TV licence. The client was on a low income with other debts
and a 5 month old dependent child.

National Debtline case study
A client from abroad with a disability contacted National Debtline after bailiffs called out for
the non-payment of a magistrates’ court fine for a TV licence. The client did not speak
English and was unable to read the letters they had been sent. We gave advice via an
interpretation service. The client found the bailiff very intimidating, offered no interpreting
service and ignored her disability. The client reported that TV Licensing were also very
unhelpful.

National Debtline case study
A client was referred to social services. A bailiff called out to collect a magistrates’ court fine
for non-payment of a TV licence. The client has a disabled son and numerous priority debts.
The bailiff took control of large number of goods including rings she was wearing and
children’s’ toys and did not leave sufficient seating.

For more information on our response, please contact:
Meg van Rooyen, Policy Manager
meg.vanrooyen@moneyadvicetrust.org
0121 410 6260

TV Licence Enforcement Review

10

The Money Advice Trust
21 Garlick Hill
London EC4V 2AU
Tel: 020 7489 7796
Fax: 020 7489 7704
Email: info@moneyadvicetrust.org
www.moneyadvicetrust.org

TV Licence Enforcement Review

11

