The Government’s response to the House of Lords
Select Committee Report on Digital Skills
Presented to Parliament
by the Minister of State for Culture and the Digital Economy
by Command of Her Majesty
July 2015

Cm 9099

© Crown copyright 2015
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence
v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence,
visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write
to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9
4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us
at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
Print ISBN 9781474121217
Web ISBN 9781474121224
ID 05061507

07/15

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office

Recommendation 1: The Government should develop an ambitious
‘Digital Agenda’ for the UK: at its heart should be the Government’s
vision for the UK to keep up with the best leading digital economies
across the board in five years’ time.
The Government is committed to ensuring that the UK remains a leading
digital economy. Putting the UK at the forefront of digital transformation is a
key priority for this Government, and at its core is the belief that the UK has
the knowledge and expertise to thrive and compete internationally. The
Government is leading from the front: the Government Digital Service has
been leading the digital transformation of public service provision, emerging,
in the words of The Washington Post, as “the gold-standard in the global
world of digital government”.
However, the Government recognises the scale and importance of the
challenges that must be addressed, and the need for far-reaching ambitions
that will have sustainable impact. To achieve a truly digital economy, we
need to work in partnership with industry to create the right conditions for
every individual and business to be able to profit from the benefits of
technology.
Training and education must keep pace with the ever-changing technological
landscape, with the right skills and infrastructure to underpin digital
transformation. These are challenges faced by all developed nations, but this
Government will focus on capitalising upon the UK’s strengths to seize the
opportunities that technology provides.
The UK has six of the top sixty universities in the world for science and
engineering, developing the highest levels of tech talent. There are also
hotbeds of capability throughout the UK, and in 2014 the Tech Nation report
identified over 20 clusters of technology expertise across the country. In terms
of infrastructure, the coverage and take-up of superfast broadband is the
highest of the 5 largest EU economies. The UK also leads the world on open
data, with over 20,000 government datasets now openly available for use by
industry.
The Government is committed to not only ‘keeping up’ with the best leading
digital economies, but being a thought leader in this space. The UK is a
founding member of the D5, a network of some of the most digitally advanced
governments in the world. The UK hosted the first summit in December 2014,
providing a platform to share best practice; for instance England’s lead in
becoming the first country in the world to mandate coding in the primary and
secondary school curriculum from September 2014.
As we go through this autumn’s Spending Review and the development of
departmental plans the Government is committed to ensuring that the UK
continues to be one of the world’s leading digital economies.

Recommendation 2: The Digital Agenda should be the responsibility of a
Cabinet Minister in the Cabinet Office, who would assume ultimate
responsibility for driving the Digital Agenda across all Government
departments.
Ed Vaizey, Minister for Culture and the Digital Economy, as a joint BIS and
DCMS Minister, reports to both Secretaries of State, which ensures that at a
Cabinet-level there will be a strong focus on Digital, both from an economic
and a social perspective. This reflects that to truly reap the benefits, digital
must be embraced in all aspects of UK citizens’ lives.
Ensuring the UK’s position as a leading digital economy is by its nature a
cross-government effort that requires cross-government Ministerial
sponsorship. Ed Vaizey chairs the Prime Minister’s implementation taskforce
on Digital Infrastructure and Inclusion whose membership includes a number
of Cabinet Ministers including Matthew Hancock, the minister responsible for
the Digital Transformation of Government. Consequently the Taskforce is
well-placed to coordinate activity across government to develop a
comprehensive digital agenda.
At an official level, in May 2015 the Digital Economy Unit (which was initially
established in July 2014 as a joint BIS and DCMS Unit) was fully moved into
DCMS under Ed Vaizey’s portfolio. This means that policy for the key
underpinning drivers for the digital economy, including skills and
infrastructure, is developed within one Department to drive collaborative
activity across Whitehall to meet the UK’s ambitions. This will ensure greater
alignment in the way that policy is developed and delivered; embedding digital
throughout government policy and bringing together the full expertise of
government and its stakeholders to drive the digital agenda forward at pace.
It also provides opportunities to further reinforce the synergies with the
Creative Industries, which form a key part of the digital landscape and sit
within the DCMS portfolio.
Recommendation 3: The responsible Cabinet Minister should evaluate
the UK’s Digital Agenda on a regular basis, seeking to drive the UK’s
digital competitiveness. The Minister should report to Parliament
annually against the measures within the Digital Agenda. We
recommend an initial progress report to Parliament by summer 2016. We
note that a similar practice is already undertaken by the Scottish
Government.
The Government agrees that it is important to regularly review and evaluate
the UK’s progress in achieving its digital objectives. A report will be provided
to Parliament via a Written Ministerial Statement in summer 2016, which will
give an update on progress in meeting the Government’s digital commitments.

Processes have also been put in place to ensure that the Government
frequently reviews and evaluates digital activity. In May 2015, the Government
announced the formation of the Digital Infrastructure and Inclusion
Implementation Taskforce which will meet frequently, ensuring that the
Government’s key digital objectives are regularly reviewed, with a clear focus
on expediting delivery. The Taskforce will provide quarterly reports to Cabinet,
ensuring there is a sustained high-level focus on the UK’s digital
competitiveness at the highest levels of government.
Recommendation 4: Our Committee has completed its work with the
production of this report, but has highlighted an issue of critical
importance that will need continuing oversight; we urge the Liaison
Committee to consider how best to integrate such a commitment into
the future work of select committees in the House of Lords.
Whilst this recommendation is for the Liaison Committee, the Government is
supportive of ensuring that digital issues continue to be discussed and
considered by Parliament.
Recommendation 5: In its response to this report we invite the incoming
Government to comment on the focus of our illustrative Digital Agenda
and to commit to designing its own, with specific detail on how it
intends to meet its objectives.
The synergies between the Committee’s draft Digital Agenda and government
activity already under way are notable. This is a positive reflection on the
shared understanding of the scale and nature of the challenge the UK faces.
Both are focused on highlighting the underpinning role that infrastructure and
skills play in maximising opportunities - not just for economic growth but for
social benefit too. The centrality of these strands is echoed by the decision to
establish the Digital Inclusion and Infrastructure Implementation Taskforce to
drive progress and ensure the right foundations are in place.
However, the Government goes further than the Committee on infrastructure,
with activity in place to make sure it is secure from natural and man-made
threats and that we are considering how new technologies can best be
exploited. We are also considering how best the UK can drive the
development of digital technologies to realise the full benefits. On regional
ecosystems and clustering, the Government is keen to make sure that digital
is being embedded at an even more local level, and that all businesses and
individuals, regardless of locale are able to capitalise on their area’s strengths
and access the support they need.
This Government is committed to meeting ambitious objectives to ensure that
the UK is at the forefront of digital transformation. In addition to work already
in train, attached at Annex A is a list of the publicly announced digital
manifesto commitments, which will be delivered over the course of this
Parliament. These set out a number of stretching objectives, which will ensure
the UK has the right infrastructure and basic digital skills for the UK to adopt
and be at the forefront of maximising the benefits of new technology.

The creation of a Digital Inclusion and Infrastructure Implementation
Taskforce, as one of only ten Implementation Taskforces, shows the high
priority that Government gives to digital. It also highlights the desire to act
quickly to ensure these ambitions are met at pace.
The manifesto commitments and the Implementation Taskforce are focused
on ensuring the UK has the right building blocks in place to secure the UK’s
place as a leading digital nation. However, this government’s ambitions go
further and are reflected in the wide ranging programmes of work already in
train to make sure that the UK is at the forefront of adopting and profiting from
new technologies. This includes activity to ensure that schools, Further
Education and Higher Education routes are providing the digital skills needed
at all levels of the economy. This Government is also undertaking work to
support the development and uptake of new technologies, and activity to
ensure that individuals and businesses are secure online.
The Government agrees with the Committee’s focus and commits to providing
an update this autumn, which provides more substantive details on the
Government’s digital agenda and how we intend to meet our commitments
through a cross-government Digital Transformation Plan (announced following
Budget 2015 within the Productivity Plan). The update report will provide a
full account of activity and aspiration across government and reflect the
outcomes of the upcoming Spending Review.
What is clear, is that these challenges cannot be underestimated, and it is
essential that activity continues at pace. The Government is now, and will
continue, working in partnership with the private, public and third sectors to
reach its ambitions.
This Government is committed to delivering an ambitious programme of
activity to ensure that the UK ‘makes’ its Digital Future.
Annex A: Key digital manifesto commitments
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Roll out universal broadband and better mobile phone connections to
ensure everyone is part of the digital economy;
Ultrafast broadband should be available to nearly all UK premises as soon
as practicable;
Invest in infrastructure to give the most comprehensive and cheapest
superfast broadband coverage of any major European country;
Delivering superfast broadband in urban and rural areas to provide
coverage to 95% of the UK by the end of 2017;
Subsidising the cost of installing high speed-capable satellite services in
the very hardest to reach areas;
Release more spectrum from public sector use to allow greater private
access;
Holding mobile operators to their legally-binding commitment to ensure
that 90 per cent of the UK landmass will have voice and SMS coverage by
2017;

•
•
•
•
•

Continue to invest in mobile infrastructure to deliver coverage for voice
calls and text messages for the final 0.3-0.4% of premises that do not
currently have it;
Ensure the UK is a world leader in the development of 5G and plays a
leading role in defining industry standards;
Fit out trains with new wifi equipment in England and Wales;
Provide free wifi in libraries and ensure remote access to e-books without
charge and with appropriate compensation for authors that enhances the
Public Lending Right scheme;
Roll out cross-government technology platforms such as GOV.UK to cut
costs and improve productivity while actively tackling digital exclusion and
ensuring digital assistance is always available for those not online.

