National Citizen Service
Trust
Draft Royal Charter
Presented to Parliament
by the Minister for Civil Society
by Command of Her Majesty
October 2016

Cm 9333

© Crown copyright 2016
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence
v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence,
visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write
to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9
4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us
at enquiries@culture.gov.uk
Print ISBN 9781474137058
PDF ISBN 9781474137065
ID P002838084

57203

10/16

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office

CONTENTS
Introduction
Draft Royal Charter for the National Citizen Service Trust

1

2
6

INTRODUCTION
The National Citizen Service Trust Draft Royal Charter accompanies the
National Citizen Service Bill (NCS Bill), introduced in the House of Lords on
11th October 2016.
National Citizen Service has been available since 2011 and exists to promote
social cohesion, social engagement and social mobility. It is a once-in-alifetime opportunity that helps young people build skills for work and life, while
taking on new challenges and meeting new friends. It is a two or four week
programme including adventure, life skills, and social action phases which
encourage 15 - 17 year olds to develop the tools and belief to unlock their
potential and make a positive impact in their communities.
The benefits of NCS for young people are clear. It boosts their resilience and
confidence, helps them meet new people, and supports them to engage in
their local communities. The NCS Bill contains provision to honour the
manifesto commitment to provide an NCS place for every young person that
wants one.
The programme is currently run by the NCS Trust, a community interest
company. The combination of the Bill and the Charter will create a new legal
framework for NCS, incorporating the NCS Trust as a Royal Charter Body.
The Bill and the Charter will ensure the Royal Charter Body is accountable to
Parliament for the governance of the programme and its use of public funds.
In particular the NCS Bill includes requirements that each year the Trust
publish a business plan and annual report for the Secretary of State to lay
before Parliament. The Trust must also submit its accounts to the National
Audit Office (NAO) to audit. The NAO must report on and certify the accounts,
and lay them before Parliament.
The Royal Charter
The Royal Charter will incorporate the NCS Trust and serves as its
constitutional document, laying down its governance arrangements. It also
preserves the independence of the Trust to work with its partners to find
innovative ways to engage young people in the NCS programme. While the
Bill ensures parliamentary accountability for the NCS’s governance and
management of public money, the Royal Charter is intended to help the NCS
Trust demonstrate its independence from government and party politics. It
confers stability on the Trust, which will help it to protect its popular brand as it
extends the NCS programme.
The draft Royal Charter has been published alongside the Bill to allow both
Houses of Parliament the opportunity to scrutinise its provisions in connection
with the Bill.
2

Primary Functions and Objectives
Article 3 of the Royal Charter defines the primary functions of the NCS Trust.
These are to arrange for the provision of programmes which enable
participants from different backgrounds to work together in communities to
carry out projects for the good of society, and to enhance the life skills of
young people. The Trust also has the function of promoting the programme
across England.
NCS is primarily a programme for 16 and 17 year olds, but article 3.2(b)
allows the NCS Trust to provide the programme to people as young as 15, or
as old as 25. This ensures the programme is accessible to those who cannot
take part aged 16 or 17 due to their individual circumstances.
Article 3.4 specifies objectives that the NCS Trust must advance when
exercising its primary functions. For example, one aim of the Trust is to
promote social cohesion, because a key aspect of NCS is that young people
from different schools and backgrounds come together to complete their
programme.
Article 3.5 specifies matters to which the Trust must have regard when
exercising its primary functions. This ensures the NCS Trust has a clear remit
on matters such as social mobility and value for money.
Appointments
Appointment of the non-executive board members will follow the
Commissioner for Public Appointments Code of Practice, focussing on the
core principles of merit, openness and fairness, as laid out in article 5.
The Monarch will appoint the Chair, on the recommendation of the Prime
Minister, following a fair and open competition. The Chair will then run another
competition for non-executive board members and recommend appointments
to the Prime Minister, who will in turn advise the Monarch.
Article 5.3 provides for a government representative to be appointed as a nonexecutive member. This is an alternative to a requirement for direct ministerial
approval in areas like pay and ensures the necessary level of government
oversight is provided by someone that understands the organisation. This
appointment is made in consultation with the NCS Trust’s Chair.
The Chief Executive, though a board member, is an employee and is
appointed under a different process. This is laid out in article 6.

3

Pay
The payment of executives and non-executives will be governed by a
remuneration policy. Article 8 requires that a remuneration committee must
approve the policy before it can be implemented. Article 8.1 provides for the
government representative to sit on the committee. The pay policy can only
be approved if the government representative votes to approve it. Further, in
the event of a tie, the government representative will have the casting vote.
This ensures proper government oversight of pay policy.
Powers
The NCS Trust has delivered NCS as a community interest company since
2013 through a network of regional and local providers. The powers and
processes set out in the Royal Charter ensure that the Trust can continue to
work independently and innovatively; equally, it must adhere to government
policy on transparency and openness. Article 9.4 ensures that government
retains control over any proposal to pay a non-executive member
remuneration that exceeds that of the Prime Minister. Article 10.4 extends this
policy to employees of the NCS Trust.
While the Trust has the right to pay non-executive members, article 9.5
provides for this information to be published on an anonymous basis at the
end of each financial year. This complements provisions in the NCS Bill for
the publication of the NCS Trust’s annual accounts.
The Royal Charter provides the NCS Trust with a high degree of procedural
autonomy. It allows the Trust to set up committees and subcommittees and
determine their procedure. This includes power to set up joint committees with
any other person, such as its delivery or commercial partners. The NCS Trust
contracts with a range of providers to deliver the programme. Article 14
provides the Trust with power to work flexibly in order to carry out its primary
functions. In particular the Trust may enter into agreements, deal with land
and make investments. However, the Trust may not borrow money: it must
remain financially sound.
Amendments
Article 15 specifies how the Charter may be amended once it has been
granted. The monarch may amend any element of the Royal Charter
providing no amendment contradicts the NCS Bill once that has gained Royal
Assent.
Article 15.2 gives the Trust power to request an amendment to the Royal
Charter. This will also be subject to the requirement to not contradict the NCS
Act. Any amendment that is proposed by the Trust requires the monarch’s
approval, on the advice of the Privy Council. This is normal practice for Royal

4

Charters as they are granted as an executive order of the monarch and so
require the monarch’s approval to be amended.
Conclusion
The Charter and the Bill will together provide a robust new legal framework for
the Trust. The Charter will underpin the long-term prestige of the NCS brand
by striking a balance between the Trust's autonomy and the need for proper
oversight of its governance and management of public money.

5

DRAFT ROYAL CHARTER FOR THE NATIONAL CITIZEN SERVICE
TRUST
ELIZABETH THE SECOND by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Our other Realms and Territories
Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith:
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING!
WHEREAS matters relating to the skills, life-chances and community
involvement of young people in England are the concern of Departments of
Our Government:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented to Us that the National Citizen
Service Trust was incorporated as a community interest company under the
Companies Act 2006 in accordance with the requirements of the Companies
(Audit, Investigations and Community Enterprise) Act 2004 in the year of Our
Lord 2013 (hereinafter called the “Community Interest Company”):
AND WHEREAS the Community Interest Company has as its objects creating
a new national institution to bring young people in England from all
backgrounds together, enhancing their life-chances by helping them to learn
new skills and supporting them to engage in local communities in order to
enrich civic society:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented unto Us that for the purpose of
carrying out the said object it is expedient that the Community Interest
Company should be incorporated under a Charter:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented to Us that it is desirable to provide
volunteering opportunities to young people in England who would not
otherwise have access to such opportunities:
AND WHEREAS We having taken the said representations into Our Royal
Consideration are minded to grant a Charter containing such provisions as
seem to Us right and suitable:
NOW KNOW YE THAT WE, by virtue of Our Prerogative Royal and of Our
special grace, certain knowledge and mere motion have willed and ordained
and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors will and ordain as
follows:
1. Incorporation
A body corporate called the National Citizen Service Trust (“the NCS
Trust”) is established.
2. Term of Charter
1. Article 4 (membership) (save for article 4.1.b) and article 5
(appointment of the non-executive members) take effect on the day
following the date the Charter is sealed.
2. The remainder of this Charter takes effect on the day after the date
by which the chair and at least eight other non-executive members
of the NCS Trust, including a representative of Our Government,
6

have been appointed, and the NCS Trust is duly established on that
day.
3. This Charter is to continue to have effect unless and until it is
revoked by Us, Our Heirs and Successors in Council, on the advice
of the Privy Council.
3. Functions of the NCS Trust
1. The primary functions of the NCS Trust, to be exercised in
accordance with the terms of this Charter, are:
a. to provide or arrange for the provision of programmes for
young people in England with the purpose ofi. enabling participants from different backgrounds to
work together in local communities to participate in
projects to benefit society, and
ii. enhancing communication, leadership and teamworking skills of participants, and
b. to promote the programmes toi. young people in England,
ii. parents and carers of young people in England,
iii. schools and other educational bodies, and
iv. local authorities and other public bodies.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1a. “young people in England” means 16 and 17 year olds, but
b. the NCS Trust may, from time to time, determine that “young
people” also includes one or more of the followingi. 15 year olds;
ii. any person who has attained the age of 18 and is
under the age of 25;
iii. any person of a particular age falling within the range
described in sub-paragraph ii.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, young people are “in England” if
they are resident in England, or receive education or training there.
4. In exercising its primary functions, the objectives of the NCS Trust
area. to promote social cohesion by ensuring equality of access to
the programmes by participants regardless of their
background or circumstances, and
b. to seek to expand the number of participants.
5. In exercising its primary functions, the NCS Trust must7

a. treat the need to safeguard and promote the wellbeing of
participants as the paramount consideration, and
b. have regard to the desirability ofi. promoting social mobility,
ii. promoting the personal and social development of
participants,
iii. promoting the employment prospects of participants
by equipping them with relevant practical skills,
iv. encouraging participants to take an interest in debate
on matters of local or national political interest, and
promoting their understanding of how to participate in
national and local elections, and
v. ensuring value for money.

4. Membership
1. The NCS Trust is to consist of—
a. the chair (see article 5),
b. the chief executive (see article 6), and
c. at least 8, but not more than 10, other members (see article 5).
2. The chair and the members within paragraph 1.c are referred to in this
Charter as the “non-executive members”.
5. Appointment of the non-executive members
1. The chair will be appointed, for a term not exceeding three years, by
Us, Our Heirs and Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy
Council and on a recommendation from Our Prime Minister.
2. Before making the recommendation Our Prime Minister must conduct a
fair, open and merit-based competition.
3. Of the non-executive members within article 4.1.c, one will be a
representative of Our Government, appointed by Our Secretary of
State for a term not exceeding three years.
4. Before making an appointment under paragraph 3, Our Secretary of
State must consult the chair.
5. The other non-executive members within article 4.1.c will be appointed,
for a term not exceeding three years, by Us, Our Heirs and
Successors in Councila. on the advice of the Privy Council, and

8

b.

on a recommendation from Our Prime Minister following the
process described in paragraph 6.

6. The chair must make recommendations on appointments to Our Prime
Minister following a fair, open and merit-based competition. The chair
should provide Our Prime Minister with a choice of appointable
candidates whose skills, experience and qualities meet the needs, as
determined by Our Secretary of State and the chair, of the role. The
competition process must be approved by Our Secretary of State.
Recommendations on appointments made by the chair must specify
the recommended term of the appointment.
7. The procedure for re-appointment of non-executive members is the
same as for appointment.
8. A person may be re-appointed as a non-executive member once only.
9. An employee of the NCS Trust may not be appointed as a nonexecutive member, and a non-executive member who becomes an
employee ceases to be a non-executive member.
6. Chief executive
1. There is to be an employee of the NCS Trust known as the chief
executive.
2. Before making an appointment of a person as the chief executive, the
NCS Trust must establish a nominations committee consisting of at
least three non-executive members, one of whom must be made chair
of the committee.
3. The purpose of the nominations committee is to make
recommendations to the NCS Trust about the appointment of the chief
executive.
4. Before making recommendations under this article, the nominations
committee must conduct a fair, open and merit-based competition.
5. Paragraphs 2 to 4 are subject to any provision about the appointment
of the first chief executive made by a scheme under Schedule 1 to the
National Citizen Service Act 2016 (transfer of staff etc from the NCS
Trust Community Interest Company).

9

7. Termination of appointments: non-executive members
1. A non-executive member of the NCS Trust may resign by giving written
notice to Our Secretary of State.
2. Our Secretary of State may terminate the appointment of a nonexecutive member of the NCS Trust by giving the member written
notice ifa.
b.

the member has been absent from three consecutive meetings of
the NCS Trust without permission from the NCS Trust, or
the member is unable, unfit or unwilling to carry out the member’s
functions.

3. Before terminating an appointment of a non-executive member (other
than the chair) under paragraph 2, Our Secretary of State must consult
the chair.
8. The remuneration committee and remuneration policy
1. The NCS Trust must establish a remuneration committee under article
11, consisting ofa. the non-executive member who is a representative of Our
Government, and
b. at least two other non-executive members,
and make one member of the committee its chair.
2. It is the function of the remuneration committee toa. make recommendations to the NCS Trust about its remuneration
policy (but not about individual pay decisions), and
b. determine whether or not to approve a remuneration policy
prepared by the NCS Trust and submitted by it to the committee
for approval.
3. Where the NCS Trust submits a remuneration policy to the
remuneration committee for approvala. a simple majority of the members of the committee present and
entitled to vote is required to approve the policy, but
b. the policy is not approved unless the non-executive member who
is a representative of Our Government votes to approve the policy.
In the event of a tie, the non-executive member who is a representative
of Our Government has a casting vote.

10

9. Pay: non-executive members
1. The NCS Trust may pay its non-executive members such remuneration
as it decides.
2. The NCS Trust may pay, or provide for the payment of, such
allowances or gratuities as it decides, to a person who is or has been
a non-executive member.
3. Decisions under paragraphs 1 and 2 must be made in accordance with
a remuneration policy prepared by the NCS Trust and approved by the
remuneration committee.
4. A decision to pay an individual the same or more than Our Prime
Minister cannot be made without the approval of Our Chief Secretary
to Our Treasury.
5. As soon as reasonably practicable after the end of each financial year,
the NCS Trust musta. publish the amount of remuneration, if any, paid under paragraph
1 in respect of each non-executive member for that year (without
identifying the member to which any particular amount relates),
and
b. publish the total amount of payments made under paragraph 2 for
that year.

10. Pay: employees
1. The NCS Trust may pay its employees such remuneration as it
decides.
2. The NCS Trust may pay, or provide for the payment of, such pensions,
allowances or gratuities as it decides, to or in respect of a person who
is or has been an employee of the NCS Trust.
3. Decisions under paragraphs 1 and 2 must be made in accordance with
a remuneration policy prepared by the NCS Trust and approved by the
remuneration committee.
4. A decision to pay an individual the same or more than Our Prime
Minister cannot be made without the approval of Our Chief Secretary
to Our Treasury.

11

11. Committees and sub-committees
1. The NCS Trust may establish committees of the NCS Trust, and those
committees may establish sub-committees.
2. The NCS Trust may establish a committee jointly with any other
person, but those committees may not establish sub-committees.
3. Subject to article 8 (remuneration committee), the number, remit and
composition of a committee or sub-committee established under
paragraph 1 or 2 are a matter for the NCS Trust but each committee or
sub-committee must include at least one member or employee of the
NCS Trust.
4. The NCS Trust may arrange for the payment of remuneration,
allowances and expenses to any person whoa. is a member of a committee or sub-committee established under
this article, but
b. is not a member or employee of the NCS Trust.
5. Decisions under paragraph 4 must be made in accordance with a
remuneration policy prepared by the NCS Trust and approved by the
remuneration committee.
12. Delegation
1. The NCS Trust may delegate any of its functions, on such terms and
conditions as it thinks fit, toa. an employee of the NCS Trust, or
b. a committee established by it.
2. A committee may delegate any of its functions to a sub-committee, on
such terms and conditions as the NCS Trust thinks fit.
13. Procedure
1. The NCS Trust may regulate its own proceedings (including quorum),
and the procedure (including quorum) of any committees or subcommittees.
2. The validity of proceedings of the NCS Trust, or of any committee or
sub-committee, is not affected bya. a vacancy, or
b. a defective appointment.
3. This article is subject to article 8 (remuneration committee).
12

14. Powers
1. Subject to paragraph 3, the NCS Trust may do anything calculated to
facilitate, or incidental or conducive to, the carrying out of any of its
functions.
2. In particular, the NCS Trust maya.
enter into agreements;
b.
acquire or dispose of land or other property;
c.
invest money;
d.
accept gifts of money, land or other property and apply it, or hold
and administer it on trust, for the purposes of carrying out any of
its functions.
3. The NCS Trust may not borrow money.
15. Charter Amendment
1. Any provision of this Charter may be added to, supplemented, varied or
omitted (in whole or in part) by Us, Our Heirs or Successors in
Council, on the advice of the Privy Council, upon such terms as We
consider fit, subject to the requirement that the effect of a change is,
where relevant, in accordance with the National Citizen Service Act
2016.
2. The NCS Trust may propose to add, supplement, vary or omit (in whole
or part) a provision of this Charter (“a proposal for change”), subject
toa.
b.

the requirement in paragraph 1, and
the restrictions in paragraphs 3 and 4.

3. The NCS Trust may not make a proposal for change in relation to the
following provisions of this Charter: article 1 (Incorporation), article 2
(Term of Charter), this article (Charter Amendment) and article 18
(Legal nature of the NCS Trust).
4. The NCS Trust may not make a proposal for change unless a
resolution is passed in favour of the proposal by a majority of not less
than three-quarters of the members present and entitled to vote at a
meeting duly convened for that purpose. The three-quarters majority
must also represent a simple majority of the total number of members
of the NCS Trust.

13

5. A proposal for change by the NCS Trust is subject to approval by Us,
Our Heirs or Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy Council.
6. A change, whether initiated under paragraph 1 or proposed by the NCS
Trust, becomes effective when approved by Us, Our Heirs or
Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy Council.
16. Surrender and winding up etc.
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, the NCS Trust may propose to
surrender this Charter and wind up or otherwise deal with the affairs
of the NCS Trust in such a manner as the NCS Trust consider fit,
provided that all remaining funds (which remain once the debts of
the NCS Trust have been paid in full) together with the proceeds
from the sale of any assets belonging to the NCS Trust are to be
paid to the Consolidated Fund.
2. A proposal to surrender this Charter and wind up or otherwise deal
with the affairs of the NCS Trust may not be made unless a
resolution is passed in favour of the proposal by a majority of not
less than three-quarters of the members of the NCS Trust present
and entitled to vote at a meeting duly convened for that purpose.
The three-quarters majority must also represent a simple majority of
the total number of members of the NCS Trust.
3. A proposal by the NCS Trust under this article is subject to approval
by Us, Our Heirs or Successors in Council, on the advice of the
Privy Council and upon such terms as We consider fit.

17. General
1. The NCS Trust has perpetual succession, and continues to exist as a
legal person, regardless of the changes in its composition which occur
when particular individuals cease to be members and are succeeded
by other individuals.
2. The NCS Trust has the capacity and powers of a natural person, and in
particular, has the capacity to sue and be sued.
3. However the NCS Trust may use these general powers only for the
purposes of the other functions set out in this Charter, or the functions
conferred by or under the National Citizen Service Act 2016 or any
other Act.

14

18. Legal nature of the NCS Trust
The word “trust” is used in the name of the NCS Trust in a colloquial
sense, to suggest a body which discharges a public trust in the exercise of
a service to the public. The word is not used in its technical legal sense,
and it is not intended to imply that members of the Trust are to be treated
as trustees of property or to be subject to the law relating to trusts or
trustees.
19. Status
1. Neither the NCS Trust nor any of its members or employees is to be
regarded as the servant or agent of the Crown, or as enjoying any
status, immunity or privilege of the Crown.
2. The NCS Trust’s property is not to be regarded as property of, or held
on behalf of, the Crown.

IN WITNESS whereof…..

15

