A Review of the Governance and
Regulation of the BBC

Sir David Clementi
March 2016

1

2

A Review of the
Governance and
Regulation of the BBC
Presented to Parliament
by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
by Command of Her Majesty
March 2016

Cm 9209

1

© Crown copyright 2016
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence,
visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write to the
Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or
email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
enquiries@culture.gov.uk
Print ISBN 9781474128131
Web ISBN 9781474128148
ID 10021601 03/16

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office

2

CONTENTS

Foreword

4

Summary of Main Recommendations

7

Chapter 1: Models of Governance and Regulation

12

Chapter 2: Mechanisms of Governance and Regulation

43

Chapter 3: Engagement with the Public

61

Chapter 4: Editorial Standards and Complaint Systems

71

Appendix 1. Terms of Reference

85

Appendix 2. List of Parties Consulted

86

Appendix 3. Table of Recommendations

89

Appendix 4. Oversight of BBC Output

93

3

FOREWORD

To the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport

1.

I have pleasure in submitting my Review of the governance and regulation of the
BBC as part of Charter Renewal.

2.

You announced on 16 September 2015 that you had asked me to carry out an
independent Review. The terms of reference stated the objectives to be:
“To conduct a review into the governance and regulation of the BBC and to make
proposals in the context of the 2015–16 Charter Review in relation to:
a. the model of governance and regulation of the BBC,
b. the specific mechanisms of governance and regulation including but not
limited to the Public Value Tests and Service Licences,
c. the way in which the BBC and the bodies that govern and regulate it
engage with licence fee payers and industry, including but not limited to
complaints handling procedures and transparency.”

3.

The full terms of reference are set out in Appendix 1. The issues under review
broadly follow questions 15 to 17 set out in the Consultation Paper that you
published in July 2015.1

4.

The Consultation Paper (sometimes referred to as the Green Paper) had a closing
date for responses of 8 October 2015. My Review has been helped by the number
and quality of responses received. Whilst a number of responses concentrated on
questions relating solely to the BBC's mission and content, a large number
addressed the questions of governance and regulation which are the subject of
this Review.

5.

I have benefited considerably from the openness of the discussions I have had
with the BBC Executive, the BBC Trust and Ofcom. I am grateful to them for the

1

Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2015). BBC Charter Review Public Consultation. [On-line]. Available at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/445704/BBC_Charter_Review_consultation_WEB.
pdf

4

time they have spent, both explaining how the current system works and engaging
in debate about possible reforms.
6.

All the major UK broadcasters submitted thoughtful papers in response to the
Consultation Paper. I have had the opportunity since to have separate meetings
with each of them, and their input has been helpful in shaping my views.

7.

A number of commentators, many of them from Universities, also submitted
responses to the Consultation Paper. I have met many of them individually over
the last few months, and held a roundtable meeting with some of them on 27
November 2015.

8.

I have had the opportunity during the course of the Review to talk to
representatives of each of the Devolved Nations about the issues within my terms
of reference.

9.

A full list of those I have consulted is set out in Appendix 2. To the extent that a
consensus emerged in my discussions, it was that the existing BBC Trust model
of governance and regulation should be dropped, albeit there were strengths
within the current system that needed to be retained. In the discussion of models
it is easier to criticise than to construct. Not surprisingly, therefore, there was less
of a consensus about what should replace it.

10. What divides those involved in the debate is not so much the arguments for or
against the different options, so much as the weight attached to individual
arguments. Almost all want an independent BBC, properly accountable to the
Licence Fee payer and to Parliament, but differ on how best to achieve it. I set out
in this Review what I hope are clear recommendations, reached after proper
consultation.
11. The issue of independence is present in almost every conversation about the BBC.
It was also the dominant theme in responses from the public to the Consultation
Paper questions on governance and regulation. I have made recommendations, in
the areas within scope, designed to promote the independence of the BBC. But it
needs to be recognised that the BBC is a Public Corporation with a privileged
funding model, that it is answerable to Parliament, and that there is a legitimate
role for Government at the time of Charter Renewal.
12. I was assisted in the Review by two officials from DCMS: Oscar Tapp Scotting,
who also acted as Secretary to the Review, and Caroline Rowley. I am extremely
5

grateful to them for their insights into the issues under review and for their hard
work. Although I received this assistance, I emphasise that I take full responsibility
for the Review.
13. In pages 7–11 I set out a ‘Summary of Main Recommendations’. The Review then
follows closely the order of issues raised in my terms of reference:
●
●
●
●

Chapter 1 looks at the different models of governance and regulation;
Chapter 2 looks at specific mechanisms of governance and regulation,
particularly around operating licences;
Chapter 3 looks at issues around engagement with the public; and
Chapter 4 looks at the issues around editorial standards and complaint
systems.

14. I set out in this Review what I believe to be clear recommendations on the issues
you have asked me to address. I hope you will feel the recommendations
represent a sensible way to move forward as part of Charter Renewal 2016.

Sir David Clementi
March 2016

6

SUMMARY OF MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS

1.

The high-level recommendations of the Review are:
●

regulatory oversight of the BBC should pass wholly to Ofcom;

●

the BBC should have a unitary Board, with a majority of Non-Executive
Directors;

●

the primary responsibility for the interests of the Licence Fee payers
should lie with the BBC Board;

●

Ofcom should issue the BBC an Operating Framework, consistent with
the revised Charter and Agreement, setting out the obligations placed on
the BBC;

●

the Operating Framework should include Operating Licences in respect
of the BBC's broadcasting content and distribution obligations; and
should include Operating Licences in respect of services for the
Devolved Nations;

●

the Charter should place on the BBC a duty to consult with the public
both as consumers and as Licence Fee payers; and

●

the BBC should have a ‘Broadcaster First’ system of complaints; appeal
above the BBC on editorial issues would be to Ofcom.

2.

The discussion and argument behind these high-level recommendations are set
out in the chapters that follow. Set out below is an executive summary.

3.

CHAPTER 1 considers models of governance and regulation for the BBC. The
Consultation Paper proposed three possible models: (i) that the existing Trust
model should be retained, albeit with changes to reflect the experience of the last
ten years; (ii) that regulatory oversight should move to a new independent body,
OfBeeb, a bespoke regulator for the BBC; and (iii) that regulatory oversight should
move to Ofcom. The Chapter considers the advantages and disadvantages of
each model.

7

4.

The Chapter analyses the Trust model and concludes that it is flawed. It conflates
governance and regulatory functions within the Trust. However re-structured, it
would still leave two Boards within one organisation, with the likelihood of
confused responsibilities.

5.

If the Trust model were rejected, the Consultation Paper suggested that the choice
lay between regulation by OfBeeb and regulation by Ofcom. In fact the choice lies
between regulation by OfBeeb and Ofcom, and regulation by Ofcom alone.
Nobody argues that the market and competition issues, which increasingly bring
the BBC into contact/competition with commercial interests, should be overseen
by anyone other than Ofcom.

6.

The strongest, and simplest, argument in favour of the Ofcom model is that Ofcom
is already the public service regulator for the United Kingdom's broadcasting
industry. It already has regulatory powers in respect of the BBC, already has
considerable experience in almost all of the regulatory issues that the BBC gives
rise to, and has during its twelve years of existence built up a significant reputation
for dealing with competition issues which are likely to come increasingly to the
fore. Ofcom has scale and credibility. It would be a strong regulator to match a
strong BBC. Against this background there would need to be a very powerful
argument for the Government to want to set up a second public services regulator,
OfBeeb. There are arguments in favour of such a bespoke regulator; but it should
be recognised that the body would have responsibility for only one organisation,
the BBC, and that precedent for a satisfactory 'single regulator–single regulatee'
relationship is poor. The Chapter concludes that the arguments for consolidating
the regulation of the BBC within Ofcom heavily outweigh those in favour of setting
up a bespoke regulator.

7.

If the recommendation of this Review is accepted, there would need to be a
further discussion about how Ofcom dealt with the significant increase in its work–
load: which responsibilities would be discharged in existing Ofcom teams, and
which might best be discharged within a new separate board within Ofcom. Any
new board should have a clear link to the Ofcom Board, similar to the Ofcom
Content Board.

8.

Alongside a single regulator, it is proposed that the BBC should have a unitary
Board, with governance responsibilities for all its activities. It would consist of a
Non-Executive Chair and Deputy Chair, a majority of Non-Executive Directors and
a small number of Executive Directors. The Board of the BBC should continue to
include members for the constituent Nations of the United Kingdom, able to
8

balance their representative role with an ability to contribute with specific skills to
the significant workload of the Board. The Chapter includes recommendations
about the size of the Board; the Directors would be in part appointed by
Government and in part appointed independently via a Nominations Committee.
9.

The primary responsibility for the interests of the Licence Fee payers should lie
with the BBC: the relationship between Licence Fee payer and Licence Fee
recipient should be direct, not via a regulator. It is proposed that the reporting
requirements on the BBC would be substantial, requiring the Corporation to
account in detail for how it had complied with the regulatory obligations placed
upon it by the Charter, Agreement and related documents. The obligations placed
on the Board, and time commitment expected of Directors, would be
considerable.

10. CHAPTER 2 looks at mechanisms of governance and regulation of the BBC. It
describes the current framework, covering Public Purposes, Purpose Remits,
Quotas, Service Licences, Statements of Programme Policy and other related
documents. It proposes a revised framework, which would flow from the new
Charter and Agreement, both as regards duties placed on Ofcom and obligations
placed on the BBC.
11. For Ofcom, the key ‘forward looking’ documents would be an Operating
Framework, which would set out how the BBC should operate across all its
activities in areas such as competition in services, distribution of content and
relationships with independent producers; and, flowing from the Operating
Framework, a series of Operating Licences, setting out what the BBC should be
delivering in its television, radio and other activities including on-line. It is also
proposed there would be Operating Licences in respect of the Devolved Nations.2
12. The key 'after the event' obligation placed on Ofcom would be the production of
an Annual Report, providing an overview of how the regulatory duties had been
delivered, and including a review of BBC delivery against Operating Licences.
Ofcom would also undertake an in-depth assessment of the BBC’s performance
against its remit once every four years.
13. The BBC Board would be required to produce a Workplan and Creative Remits
document, providing a ‘forward looking’ view of how it planned to deliver against
its Operating Licences. This would include associated budgets. The key 'after the

2

The Devolved Nations of the United Kingdom are Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales.

9

event' document would be the Annual Report and Accounts, detailing the BBC’s
performance against a long list of obligations placed on the unitary Board.
14. The Chapter goes on to look at the mechanisms for making changes to licences in
the periods between Charter Reviews. The current operation of a Public Value Test
is described, and proposals made for its evolution. There should be greater
flexibility so that changes to services face appropriate and proportionate scrutiny
whilst being determined to a tighter timescale. The determination of whether a full
Public Value Test were required would rest with the Board of the BBC. This
responsibility would be balanced by a broad right of Ofcom to ‘step-in’ to
investigate where it felt that the public interest issues had not been fully
considered. Where a full Public Value Test were carried out, Ofcom would be the
final arbiter of whether the change was in the public interest.
15. CHAPTER 3 considers the way in which the BBC engages with the public. Under
the current Charter, specific duties are placed on the BBC Trust in respect of
engagement with Licence Fee payers in a broad sense: to know the views of
audiences both in regard to issues around individual programmes and services,
and also in regard to wider issues such as value for money. The new Charter
should place similar obligations on the Board of the BBC.
16. The Chapter discusses the existing out-reach work of the BBC Trust, and in
particular the Audience Councils, which are prescribed in detail in the current
Charter. Having these Councils chaired by a Director of the BBC unitary Board
would bring the Councils closer to the decision-making body of the BBC.
Furthermore, the introduction of an Operating Licence for each of the Devolved
Nations would give greater substance to the work of the related Council.
17. Overarching these issues is the growing ability for any organisation to relate to its
public through digital platforms. New technologies and techniques should mean
that during the next Charter period the BBC will be able to engage more effectively
with the public and understand the public interest better than ever before. The
BBC already has a considerable audience linked to its platforms; and the new
Charter should encourage the BBC in its work to reach out to the public as widely
as possible. Given the speed of change, it is proposed that the Charter should be
less prescriptive than at present in how the out-reach obligations are met.
18. There would be a requirement on the BBC to demonstrate in its Annual Report
and Accounts how its Charter obligations had been met, and delivery in this

10

respect would be subject to oversight by Ofcom. Ofcom itself is likely to broaden
the audience research it already carries out.
19. CHAPTER 4 looks specifically at the Editorial Standards and Complaints System
of the BBC. The current system is complicated and confusing, since the remit of
the BBC Trust and Ofcom overlap. Ofcom can hear complaints against the BBC,
subject to certain exclusions of which the most important is editorial complaints
about 'accuracy and impartiality'. The BBC Trust can investigate any complaint,
even if it is within the Ofcom remit. Although the majority of complaints do go
direct to the BBC and are dealt with by the Corporation itself, complaints may also
go direct to Ofcom.
20. It is proposed that the BBC should adopt a formal 'Broadcaster First' rule, subject
to a right of ‘step-in’ by the regulator, Ofcom, in exceptional circumstances. The
Chapter includes suggestions for simplifying the existing BBC arrangements for
handling complaints. Complaints to the BBC would be judged against the BBC
Editorial Guidelines, which would be the responsibility of the unitary Board.
21. Appeals against judgements of the BBC would be made to Ofcom and would be
heard against the Ofcom Broadcasting Code. It is argued that this would not lead
to any diminution in the BBC’s editorial standards. This is in part because the
Editorial Guidelines of the BBC and the Ofcom Code are similar in how they define
the important editorial test of 'accuracy and impartiality'; and in part because the
responsibility for upholding the highest standards of editorial integrity rests not
with the Regulator, but squarely with the BBC itself, as a key part of the remit of
the unitary Board. Whilst the reputation of Ofcom and its Content Board for
editorial integrity is high, regulation by Ofcom represents a second line of defence.
The Chapter also includes recommendations for broadening the scope of Ofcom’s
existing coverage of the BBC’s output.
22. Overall I believe that the recommendations in this Review would add significantly
to the transparency and accountability of the BBC. The Corporation would have a
unitary Board responsible for all its activities; it would have a single regulator,
Ofcom, to whom it would be accountable. The Board must act in accordance with
the obligations placed upon it by the Charter and related documents and should
have a clear responsibility for the interests of the Licence Fee payers who fund it.

11

CHAPTER 1: MODELS OF GOVERNANCE AND REGULATION

Introduction
1.

The issues around the governance of the BBC, and how it should be regulated,
have been much discussed over a considerable period. This Review has
benefited from a number of documents which deal at length with the issues. I refer
in particular to the ‘Independent Panel on the BBC Charter Review’ chaired by
Lord Burns, with the final report dated January 2005 (‘The Burns Report’);3 and to
the House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee report ‘Future of the
BBC’ dated February 2015 (‘the CMS Select Committee Report of February
2015’).4

2.

As a result, most of the arguments for and against different models have been in
the public domain for some time. But whilst the questions may be the same as
those asked in the past, it is reasonable for the answers to be different, informed
by further evidence of how existing models have worked, and by developing views
on what represents good practice.

3.

The Consultation Paper was published in July 2015 by the Secretary of State and
set out three possible models:
i.

the existing Trust model, with the BBC Executive and BBC Trust both
covered by the BBC Charter, would be retained, albeit with some changes
to reflect things which have gone well and those which have not;

ii.

the OfBeeb model, leaving governance of the BBC within a unitary Board,
and removing the regulatory functions to a new public services
broadcasting body, OfBeeb; and

iii.

the Ofcom model, again leaving governance of the BBC within a unitary
Board, but moving the regulatory role to Ofcom.

3
Burns, T. (2005) Final advice presented to the Secretary of State [On-line]. Available at:
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.bbccharterreview.org.uk/pdf_documents/050123a_Governance.pdf
Burns, T. (2004). Independent Panel on BBC Charter Review [On-line]. Available at:
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.bbccharterreview.org.uk/pdf_documents/041130_emerging_themes.pdf
4
House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee, (2015), Future of the BBC Fourth Report of Session 2014–15, [On-line].
Available at: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmcumeds/315/315.pdf

12

4.

In the OfBeeb model the new regulatory body is occasionally referred to as a
Public Service Broadcasting Commission (PSBC). It would be possible in principle
for such a body to regulate all the public service broadcasters who, in addition to
the BBC, include the Channel 3 licensees (ITV, STV and UTV), Channel 4, Channel
5 (owned by Viacom) and the Gaelic and Welsh language channels, BBC Alba and
S4C. This would give the new body a view across the full range of Public Service
Broadcasters. But such a model would create at least as many problems as it
might resolve. For the commercial Public Service Broadcasters, such as ITV and
Channel 5, it would mean that part of their operations would be overseen by the
PSBC regulator, and part would remain with Ofcom. This model of a ‘wide’ remit
PSBC was not put forward as an option in the Consultation Paper, in my view
correctly. So where in this paper the term PSBC is used, it is taken to be a
‘narrow’ public service regulator dealing essentially with the BBC.

5.

This Review has the benefit of evidence from nearly ten years of operation of the
current system. It also presents an opportunity to re-visit some of the issues of
principle which should determine a good regulatory system. Foremost of these is
the split between governance and regulation.

6.

Governance and regulation need to be thought about as separate activities.
Governance is about how an entity organises itself in its boards, committees and
other decision-making bodies, setting strategic objectives and budgets for the
organisation, seeking to be effective and efficient, as well as accountable to those
it serves and those to whom it is responsible. The final authority of the entity,
generally a Board or a Council, will be accountable for the organisation and will
speak for its activities. Regulation is the exercise of oversight by an authority to
ensure that the regulatee is fulfilling the obligations placed upon it, for example by
Charter, by statute or direct from the regulatory authority under powers granted to
it in areas such as standard setting. A regulator should be independent of those it
regulates.

7.

Accountability should be thought of not as a function separate from governance
and regulation, but as an inherent part of a good governance and regulatory
system. The interests of accountability are well served by a model in which
bodies have clear responsibilities; and poorly served by a model in which the
parties have overlapping responsibilities with the potential for confused
accountability.

8.

There are some criteria which any revised model for the BBC needs to satisfy:

13

i.

Does the model provide a clear and independent split between those
responsible for governance and those responsible for regulatory
functions?

ii.

In respect of regulation, is there clarity about where responsibilities lie,
such that any duplication is minimised?

iii.

Is there confidence that the model provides adequate protection for those
outside the BBC who may be affected by the Corporation’s activities, in
particular in respect of competition issues?

iv.

In respect of governance, is there a clear split between executive and nonexecutive functions?

v.

Are the responsibilities placed on the Board of the BBC clear and
consistent with the obligations placed on it by the Charter, Agreement and
related documents?

vi.

Is there a clear line of accountability from the BBC to the Licence Fee
payers and to Parliament in respect of the obligations placed on the
Corporation?

9. Overarching all these considerations there needs to be confidence that, if a
‘correct’ governance system is laid alongside a ‘correct’ regulatory system, the
Executive of the BBC would still have the vitality to produce distinctive, high
quality and innovative programming. Everybody wants a BBC which is editorially
independent, properly answerable to Licence Fee payers and accountable to
Parliament. We also want a BBC which in its programming is not risk averse, but
vibrant and occasionally irreverent.
10. The remainder of this Chapter is set out in the following order:
● Section 1 looks at the BBC Trust option;
● Section 2 looks at the proposal that the regulatory responsibility should
be in a new body, OfBeeb;
● Section 3 looks at the proposal that the regulatory responsibility should
move to Ofcom;

14

● Section 4 discusses some of the detailed aspects of a unitary Board for
the BBC, such as membership and appointments; and
● Section 5 sets out conclusions on the issue of models and the unitary
Board.

Section 1.
The BBC Trust Option
11. The existing Trust model under the BBC Charter has a two-tier Board. The
Executive Board (which has on it a number of Non-Executive Directors) is
responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Corporation. The Trust Board has
oversight of the operational performance of the Executive Board, but also has
responsibility for the strategic direction of the Corporation. In addition it has
powers to issue Service Licences for all BBC television and radio channels, and
the power, subject to consultation with Ofcom in respect of market impact, to alter
Service Licences via a Public Value Test process. Through its Editorial Committee
it has regulatory oversight of all of the BBC’s output.
12. There are areas where the Trust has done good work. These need to be
safeguarded in whatever model is eventually put in place. In particular, in the
responses to the Consultation Paper, it was felt:
i.

that the BBC Trust’s work in the issue and review of Service Licences,
together with the Public Value Tests, was an important step forward
relative to what had gone earlier. This is considered further in Chapter 2;

ii.

that the out-reach work in respect of audiences carried out by the Trust
needed to be maintained. This is considered in Chapter 3; and

iii.

that the work done by the Editorial Committee of the Trust was of
considerable value. The issue of editorial oversight is considered in
Chapter 4.

13. Whilst the Trust has achieved some success, it has also been the subject of
criticism. The particular issues around accountability for remuneration and IT
systems have illustrated the confusion about where responsibilities lie between the
Executive and the Trust. There is also concern about duplication of effort. The
Annual Budget has to go through a full approval process, involving NonExecutives at the Executive Board level, and again at the Trust Board level. The
15

Audit Committee of the Executive Board and the Value for Money Committee of
the Trust Board often look at the same issues.
14. It might be possible to reform the current arrangements to improve some of the
weaknesses of the Trust model. But there are two weaknesses which are inherent
in the structure and which would be hard to eliminate: (i) the model involves a twotier board and there will always be a residual confusion as to governance
responsibilities in such an arrangement; and (ii) the model conflates governance
and regulation, contrary to the broad principle that they should be kept separate.
The Two-Tier Board Structure
15. In respect of 14(i) above, since the BBC Trust Board is part of the Corporation and
stands above the BBC Executive Board, the BBC is recognised as having a twotier board structure. Within the governance arrangements for the BBC, there is a
paper entitled ‘Review of BBC Internal Governance’, dated December 2013 and
signed by both the Trust Board and the Executive Board.5 The paper sets out how
they are to work together and where responsibilities lie. As a generalisation it is
intended that operational issues should lie with the Executive Board, and strategic
issues with the Trust Board. But this distinction on paper breaks down in the face
of events. There are many day-to-day functions, for example running an IT
system, which are plainly operational matters for the Executive Board, but when
they go badly wrong become a matter for the Trust Board. It is inevitable that
there will be overlaps, and gaps, between the operation of the two Boards. When
things do go wrong, there will always be the question: “who knew what?” For this
reason good governance, certainly within the United Kingdom, holds that a single
tier Board is to be preferred to a two-tier system.
16. It is a truth commonly observed that good governance does not guarantee good
decision-making. But at least in a single Board structure there is no doubt as to
which Board is responsible when things go wrong, and where the responsibility
lies for putting things right.
Governance and Regulation
17. In respect of 14(ii) above, the BBC Trust is set up under the Charter and is part of
the BBC; it is the sovereign authority of the Corporation. The Chair of the Trust
also carries the title of Chair of the BBC. The Trust appoints the Director General
5
Patten and Hall (2013), Review of BBC Internal Governance: A joint review by the BBC Trust and the BBC Executive Board [Online]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/governance_review_2013.pdf

16

(Chief Executive) and is responsible for the Corporation's Strategic Plan. It is part
of the governance framework of the BBC and must speak for it.
18. The Trust also oversees all of the Corporation's activities, to ensure that it
complies with its responsibilities under the Charter, the Agreement and Service
Licences, and that it acts in the public interest, using mechanisms such as Public
Value Tests. It is the principal regulatory body of the BBC.
19. The BBC Trust, therefore, brings together in the Trust Board both governance
responsibilities for the BBC and regulatory responsibilities. They do not sit
comfortably together. It is for this reason that some argue that the Trust is "both
cheerleader and regulator".
20. Given that the BBC Trust is the sovereign body of the BBC, it would be difficult to
re-draw the roles to achieve a clear separation, making the BBC Executive fully
responsible for operational and strategic matters, and leaving the Trust in a purely
regulatory role. Even if it were possible to re-draw the lines in the Charter in this
manner, one would still be left with two organisations sitting in one legal entity.
Not surprisingly, best practice requires regulator and regulatee to be in different
legal entities.
21. Overall I conclude that the BBC Trust model is flawed. It conflates governance and
regulatory functions within the Trust, which leads to confusion about the Trust's
role. In its governance mode the BBC operates a two-tier board structure which
leads to confused responsibilities.
22. I also conclude that the BBC should have a single unitary Board, clearly
responsible for governing its activities; and that regulatory functions in respect of
the BBC should be in a separate body from the BBC.

Section 2.
The OfBeeb Option
23. The Consultation Paper set out, as its second option, a model in which the primary
regulator of the BBC would be a special regulator, tailor-made to regulate the
Corporation. The arguments made in favour of this OfBeeb model are:
i.

it helps to provide a clear split between BBC governance issues, which
would remain with the unitary Board of the Corporation, and the regulatory
17

issues which would move to OfBeeb. There would thus be a clear
organisational separation between regulator and regulated entity;
ii.

the BBC is a special category organisation, with a privileged funding
model; and the level of public funding, separate from the commercial
funding of other broadcasters, requires special scrutiny, best done by a
separate regulator;

iii.

the public expects the BBC to operate to higher standards than other
broadcasters, especially in the area of editorial content, and these
standards are best overseen by a bespoke hands-on regulator; and

iv.

OfBeeb would be able to concentrate on the BBC, rather than be
distracted by other broadcasters, permitting greater accountability through
regular reports of its activities to Licence Fee payers, Parliament and other
stakeholders.

24. In relation to 23(iii) above, the BBC publishes a handbook of its Editorial
Guidelines. Whether or not the BBC’s standards are ‘higher’ than the rest of the
industry, it certainly operates with a different handbook than other broadcasters
whose own internal codes tend to follow more closely the Ofcom Broadcasting
Code. The BBC Guidelines are different in two main respects:
i.

the Guidelines are more prescriptive about how journalists and
programme makers carry out their duties, i.e. they deal at some length
with inputs, as well as what is actually broadcast; and

ii.

the Guidelines go much wider than the Code for other broadcasters,
covering all of the BBC’s activities including on-line material which Ofcom
does not look at.

25. As the Consultation Paper made clear, the OfBeeb model was proposed in the
Burns Report when it looked at the issue ten years ago, ahead of the 2006 Charter
Review. More recently the CMS Select Committee Report of February 2015 also
proposed a variant of this model.
26. The detailed powers of the regulator, however, were different in the models
proposed by the Burns Report and by the CMS Select Committee Report of
February 2015. The Burns Report proposed a PSBC which maintained direct
control powers, for example, to reject or approve a strategic plan. The CMS Select
18

Committee Report proposed that the regulator should have oversight powers,
investing the direct powers in the BBC Board.
27. The PSBC proposed in the CMS Select Committee Report was "not to have a
formal role in approving the BBC's overall strategy: its duty in the first instance
would be to scrutinise the BBC's strategy in a very public way, publishing its views
on the BBC Board’s performance and future priorities. Similarly, the PSBC would
scrutinise individual services against their purpose remits, as has happened with
service licence agreements under the Trust, holding the BBC to account for
performance and making recommendations on spending priorities and for
changes to service remits. The PSBC would not formally set individual
budgets...."6
28. If the OfBeeb model were adopted, it should be said that the oversight powers
proposed in the CMS Select Committee Report would be more appropriate for a
regulator, maintaining the separation between governance and regulation.
29. The argument for a separate OfBeeb was made by one commentator and
summarised in the sentence: “The BBC is big enough, important enough and
different enough to have its own regulator.”7 This soundbite requires analysis:
●

‘Big enough’: that size should be a factor in determining whether an
organisation would merit a separate regulator is an unusual regulatory
principle. If anything, the argument points the other way: that larger
organisations should come under the same body as smaller organisations
to ensure that all receive proportionate and even-handed treatment;

●

‘Important enough’: this would generally dictate the level of attention and
focus given to the organisation by the regulator, rather than the need for a
separate regulator. In some regulatory systems, important organisations
are subject to ‘close and continuous’ regulatory scrutiny, beyond the
scrutiny of less important organisations; and

●

‘Different enough’: this is a stronger argument, similar to the argument in
23(ii) and 23(iii) above. A number of responses to the Consultation Paper
argued that the level of public funding and different editorial standards put
the BBC into a special category. But difference does not in itself

6
House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee (2015). ‘Licence Fee Payers’ Interests: Public Service Broadcasting
Commission’ (para.302), in Future of the BBC: Fourth Report of Session 2014–15 [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmcumeds/315/315.pdf
7
Starks, M (2015). ‘The Ofcom Option’, in Regulating the BBC as a Public Service [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.vlv.org.uk/broadcasting-files/VLV-final-Starks.pdf

19

necessitate a separate regulator, unless the existing regulator has no
capacity to flex its behaviour according to the broadcaster involved.
Within a single industry ‘difference’ speaks more to the need for flexible
regulation than separate regulation.
30. A number of respondents to the Consultation argued that an advantage of OfBeeb
was that it could “represent the interests of licence fee payers and hold the BBC
Board to account.”8 The Regulator should hold the BBC to account in respect of
the BBC’s regulatory obligations. But the primary responsibility for the interests of
Licence Fee payers should lie with the unitary Board.
31. One of the characteristics of the current model is that the Trust represents the
interests of the Licence Fee payers: it is a part of the BBC and charged with this
responsibility under the Charter. But it implies that the BBC Executive is to a
degree free from this responsibility. Whatever model is chosen, it is important that
the members of the unitary Board recognise that the responsibility for the interests
of Licence Fee payers rests with them. The link between Licence Fee payer and
Licence Fee recipient should be direct, not via the regulator. The role of the
regulator in this regard is a secondary one.
32. There are arguments made against the OfBeeb model:
i.

as referred to in the Consultation Paper, a ‘single regulator–single
regulatee’ relationship is hard to manage: it is difficult for a single
regulator, with only one organisation to oversee, to retain an industry
perspective, such that the relationship either becomes too close, or too
adversarial. The point was also referred to in the Burns Report: “It is
increasingly regarded a poor regulatory practice to institute regulators with
only one “client”: this model has been tried and rejected in the energy
sector, for example”;9

ii.

it would leave the BBC with two public broadcasting regulators, one
specifically focused on BBC issues, the other looking at the BBC
alongside other Public Service Broadcasters, as well as alongside
commercial broadcasters. This is likely to lead to some confusion of
regulatory roles and accountability.

8
Voice of the Listener & Viewer (2015). Response by Voice of the Listener & Viewer to the BBC Charter Review DCMS Green Paper
Public Consultation (s.207) [On-line]. Available at: http://www.vlv.org.uk/broadcasting-files/VLV-Submission-to-DCMS-CharterReview-Oct-2015-FINAL.pdf
9
Burns, T. (2004). Independent panel on BBC Charter Review (s.5.29) [On-line], Available at:
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.bbccharterreview.org.uk/pdf_documents/041130_emerging_themes.pdf

20

33. The following paragraphs look at how, in the OfBeeb model, the relationship
between OfBeeb and Ofcom might be structured.
Relationship between OfBeeb and Ofcom
34. There is at present a Memorandum of Understanding between the BBC Trust and
Ofcom.10 It refers to a large number of regulatory areas in which the two
organisations must work together, but the most important are:
i.

programme quotas: Ofcom is responsible for overseeing a regime of
targets and quotas in the areas of:
●
●
●
●
●

news and current affairs;
original productions;
programming for the Nations and the regions;
out of London production; and
programming from independent producers;

ii.

editorial standards: the Trust is the sole regulator with regard to ‘accuracy
and impartiality’ and commercial references in programmes for the BBC's
public broadcast services and for its on-line services. However, Ofcom
has powers to regulate the BBC's UK Licence Fee funded broadcasts and
UK streamed services with regard to editorial standards in seven areas,
chief of which concern protecting under 18s; harm and offence; product
placement; fairness and privacy;

iii.

complaints: whilst complaints in respect of editorial ‘accuracy and
impartiality’ may only be made to the BBC, with appeals heard by the BBC
Trust, complaints in respect of most other matters may be made direct to
Ofcom; and

iv.

competition issues: Ofcom has an important role to play in cases where
the Trust is considering significant new service proposals or significant
changes to existing services. The Trust is responsible for conducting
Public Value Tests (PVTs) to determine whether it will permit such
changes, and the related Market Impact Assessment conducted by Ofcom
is a key input into that process. Ofcom is also involved at the beginning of

10
Memorandum of Understanding Between The Office of Communications (Ofcom) and the BBC Trust (2007) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.ofcom.org.uk/content/about/how-ofcom-is-run/committees/ofcombbc/Memorandum_of_Understanding_between_The_Office_of_Communications_(Ofcom)_and_the_BBC_Trust.pdf
Amendments to the Memorandum of Understanding are available on-line at: http://www.ofcom.org.uk/about/how-ofcom-isrun/committees/ofcom-bbc-joint-steering-group/?a=0

21

the process to provide advice on whether the ‘significant’ threshold for a
PVT has been crossed.11
35. One suggestion is that the existing MOU between the BBC Trust and Ofcom could
be adapted from its present form, and that the regulatory responsibilities currently
placed on the Trust could pass to OfBeeb. Recognising that this would still leave
a significant level of responsibility with both OfBeeb and Ofcom, some
commentators have sought to suggest a different split of responsibilities.
36. In the CMS Select Committee Report of February 2015 it was proposed that
Ofcom, in addition to its existing responsibilities for programme quotas and
competition issues, should also take responsibility for all content regulation,
including overview of editorial standards and complaints. OfBeeb would be
responsible for the issuance of the Operating Framework and Licences, oversight
of the BBC’s performance against these obligations and initiating and concluding
on PVTs.
37. This ‘OfBeeb Light’ model, with the list of oversight duties split between OfBeeb
and Ofcom as set out in the paragraph above, begs the question of who would be
responsible for regulating the BBC? The answer would be that the BBC would be
regulated by two public broadcasting regulators with split responsibilities. The
primary responsibility for holding the BBC to account in respect of its Operating
Licences would be OfBeeb; but it would have limited involvement in setting quotas
for Licences, not be involved in the overview of editorial standards, not be
involved with complaints mechanisms, and not be involved in the BBC's interface
with market partners and competitors. Removed from direct line of sight of a
number of core regulatory activities in respect of the BBC, it is not clear that
OfBeeb would be able to carry out its responsibility effectively.
38. An alternative suggestion made is that some of the activities covered by the MOU
should move in the opposite direction, from Ofcom to OfBeeb.12 The ‘OfBeeb
Heavy’ proposal, in its widest form, is that all content regulation carried out by
Ofcom in respect of the BBC should move to OfBeeb. Even if moving activities
out of Ofcom into OfBeeb were the right thing to do, it would still leave Ofcom
involved in the quota system for all Public Service Broadcasters and with a
responsibility for periodic reviews of the PSB market. Further, nobody suggests
that Market Impact Assessments, or the market judgements in respect of other
competition issues, could come from anyone other than Ofcom. So Ofcom would
11

Information on the ‘significance’ test is set out in Chapter 2, paragraph 23.
Starks, M (2015). ‘A BBC Specific External Regulator’, in Regulating the BBC as a Public Service [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.vlv.org.uk/broadcasting-files/VLV-final-Starks.pdf
12

22

continue to have an important role, and the BBC would be left with two public
service regulators; both would take a keen interest in its affairs, but neither would
have full responsibility for regulatory oversight.

Section 3.
The Ofcom Option
39. The Consultation Paper set out as its third option a model in which all regulatory
matters relating to the BBC would be consolidated within Ofcom.
40. Ofcom was established as a body corporate by the Office of Communications Act
2002. Ofcom is the regulator for the UK Communications industries with
responsibility across television, radio, postal, telecommunications and wireless
communications services.
41. Section 3(1) of the Communications Act 200313 states: “It shall be the principal
duty of Ofcom, in carrying out their functions (a) to further the interests of citizens
in relation to communications matters; and (b) to follow the interests of consumers
in relevant markets, where appropriate by promoting competition.” Under Section
3(2)(a) Ofcom is required to secure: "the availability throughout the United
Kingdom of a wide range of television and radio services which (taken as a whole)
are both of high quality and calculated to appeal to a wide variety of tastes and
interests."14
42. Under Section 198 of the Communications Act 200315 Ofcom is authorised “to
regulate the provision of the BBC's services and the carrying on by the BBC of
other activities for purposes connected with the provision of those services”, to
the extent that provision to do so is contained in the Charter, the Agreement, the
Communications Act and Part 5 of the Broadcasting Act 1946.
43. It is clear that Ofcom, in addition to its role as the economic regulator of the
broadcasting industry, is also a public service regulator. Its constitution requires it
to consider the interests of citizens.16 In a number of its regulatory judgements it

13
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 1 Functions of OFCOM’ (s.3 (1)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/3
14
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 1 Functions of OFCOM’ (s.3 (2)(c)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/3
15
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 3 Television and Radio Services’ (s.198) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/198
16
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 1 The Functions of OFCOM’ (s.3 (1)(c)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/3

23

has to consider public value issues, not least in its review of Public Service
Broadcasting as set out under Section 264 of the Communications Act 2003.17
44. Ofcom does not treat all broadcasters alike. It does look separately at those
broadcasters who carry public broadcasting obligations in exchange for certain
privileges. In particular Ofcom oversees Channel 4's specific accountability
arrangements comprised of the Statement of Media Content policy (SMCP); this is
an annual report which details how Channel 4 has delivered against its public
remit as outlined in legislation and how it intends to meet its duties in the year
ahead. The SMCP is developed in consultation with Ofcom and the accountability
process includes a formal annual scrutiny session with Ofcom and its Content
Board. At the end of the regulatory review process Ofcom sends a public letter
from the Chair and Chief Executive, which provides an assessment of Channel 4's
delivery against its public remit. The Digital Economy Act 2010 also requires
Ofcom to conduct a periodic and longer-term review of Channel 4's assessment
of its remit delivery, the last of which was published in July 2015.
45. An important part of the regulatory work of Ofcom is carried out in its Content
Board. Whilst all broadcasters are subject to the Ofcom Broadcasting Code
which requires ‘due impartiality and due accuracy’, the Content Board does
interpret this requirement according to the broadcaster under review. The context
of any complaint, and the expectations of the audience, is taken into account. A
complaint about due impartiality of a news item would be determined in a different
light if the broadcaster were ITN as opposed to, say, a broadcaster backed by the
Government of a foreign country. In short, Ofcom does have the flexibility to
regulate different broadcasters differently, and has experience of doing so.
46. Against this background the strongest, and simplest, argument in favour of this
third option is that Ofcom is already the public service regulator for the United
Kingdom's broadcasting industry, and already has regulatory powers in respect of
the BBC; and that in these circumstances there needs to be a very strong
argument for setting up a second public services regulator.
47. The arguments made in favour of the Ofcom option are:
i.

as with the OfBeeb model, it provides a clear split between governance
and regulatory functions;

17
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 3 Television and Radio Services’ (s. 264) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/264

24

ii.

as commented above, Ofcom is already a public sector broadcasting
regulator, with responsibility “to further the interests of citizens in relation
to communications matters”.18 It already has regulatory responsibilities for
a number of BBC activities. It already has powers to regulate different
broadcasters differently, and has experience of doing so;

iii.

Ofcom has the capacity to look at the BBC in the context of the market as
a whole. Current trends will bring the BBC into greater contact/
competition with commercial companies, ranging now beyond the
traditional network broadcasters to include platform operators, on-line
media players, broadband networks and others. The competitor
landscape is further complicated by partnership arrangements between
the BBC and external players. These trends argue for a regulator with a
wide knowledge of the industry, rather than one with a narrow focus;

iv.

Ofcom has scale and credibility. It has considerable resources. It would
be a strong regulator to match a strong BBC unitary Board;

v.

bringing all regulatory oversight of the BBC under one roof would obviate
the need for a Memorandum of Understanding which would need to exist
in the OfBeeb model between OfBeeb itself and Ofcom; and

vi.

there are sure to be operational efficiencies in seeking to maintain one
outstanding regulator of public broadcasting services, rather than two with
some shared responsibilities.

48. Arguments in favour of Ofcom have been made in a number of replies to the
Consultation Paper, but were also referred to in the Burns Report: “Those who
argue for Ofcom mention that it would be strange to set up a regulator for
communications and broadcasting in general, and then to exclude the BBC from
its remit indefinitely, and that it is vitally important for the future of the PSB that
someone is able to look at the whole of the broadcasting ecosystem. In its recent
publications on public service television Ofcom has demonstrated that it has
already developed a good understanding of the issues. It has framed the BBC’s
performance within the wider provision of PSB, thus providing for the first time an
accurate measure of the BBC’s contribution as a whole.”19 This argument had
18
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 1 The Functions of OFCOM’ (s.3 (1)(a)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/3
19
Burns, T (2004). Independent Panel on BBC Charter Review (para. 5.25) [On-line]. Available at:
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.bbccharterreview.org.uk/pdf_documents/041130_emerging_themes.pdf

25

force when written in 2004; it has still more force today following a further ten
years of Ofcom regulatory experience of public service broadcasting.
49. It would be important to ensure Ofcom’s regulation of the BBC had a funding
stream that was secure and separately identifiable from its wider funding
arrangements. The regulation of the BBC is currently funded through the Licence
Fee, with the BBC Trust receiving its funds from the BBC, and Ofcom receiving
fees from the BBC in respect of its regulatory role. The same principle should
apply in the future if all regulation passed to Ofcom. It would need to account for
its expenditure in this area through its Annual Report and Accounts.
50. The arguments made against Ofcom are:
i.

that Ofcom is already a powerful organisation. To give it full
responsibility for the BBC invests it with too much power. Given the
importance of the media sector, some plurality of broadcast regulators is
to be welcomed. If it were given responsibility for regulating the BBC as
well as the wider market, it would effectively be able to determine the
relative size of different companies;

ii.

that there would be a conflict of interest for Ofcom if it had responsibility
both for the proper conduct of the commercial broadcasting market and
for regulating the BBC in the public interest; and

iii.

that Ofcom is ill-equipped with the necessary skills to carry out much of
the specialised and focused regulatory work that is necessary to oversee
the BBC. Further, Ofcom’s scope of regulatory reach in editorial matters
is insufficient for the work required in connection with the BBC. This
work would be better done by OfBeeb.

51. In connection with 50(i) above, it is right to say that Ofcom is already a powerful
regulator in determining what the competitive landscape looks like. Given the
convergence of the broadcasting and telecommunications industries, and the size
of some of the companies within this space, it is as well that Ofcom has
considerable power. Further, as noted above, giving the BBC a unitary Board, with
the ability to speak with one voice, will create a more powerful BBC. It will need a
powerful regulator, with significant resources and wide experience across the
market, to be able to match it.

26

52. In connection with 50(ii) above, Ofcom is not solely an economic regulator; it
already has responsibility for oversight of all public service broadcasters and is
already charged in its existing functions with responsibility for meeting the public
interest. Public sector regulators generally have a number of statutory objectives,
and often find that these objectives are not aligned in the actions called for in a
particular set of circumstances. They have to move forward making difficult
judgements in which the public interest should have primacy. Ofcom has the
experience to make these types of judgements.
53. In connection with 50(iii) above, whether or not Ofcom has all the expertise and
powers necessary to take full regulatory responsibility for the BBC, it has a
headstart over OfBeeb on the grounds that the latter does not actually exist. In
practice a good deal of the detailed regulatory expertise in respect of the BBC lies
in the BBC Trust, particularly in the area of Service Licences. I would expect those
with this expertise to transfer to whichever regulatory body took over the related
role. The changes necessary to widen the scope of Ofcom’s editorial oversight are
discussed in Chapter 4.
54. Whatever additional resources Ofcom were to receive, it should be recognised
that it already has significant expertise in most of the relevant areas:
i.

it is already deeply involved in Public Service Broadcasting issues such as
the quota system and publishing PSB Reviews;

ii.

it is already heavily involved in editorial issues, having to adjudicate
‘accuracy and impartiality’ issues for other parts of the broadcasting
industry; and

iii.

it is already heavily immersed in complaints for the rest of the industry,
and specifically in complaints against the BBC in the area of ‘harm and
offence’.

55. For this analysis, the more relevant question is not whether Ofcom has at present
all the expertise and powers necessary to carry out the regulatory duties that
might be laid upon it, but whether further involvement with the BBC would
prejudice its ability to carry out its important existing duties, or in other ways
disrupt the institution. The possibility of this must exist but, if the decision were
taken by Government to add to its responsibilities, it would be for the Ofcom
Board to take steps to minimise the impact. Further involvement with the BBC
would add to its responsibilities for issues around the interests of citizens and
27

public value, with an attendant increase in reputational risk to the organisation, but
these changes come in the area of the broadcasting industry with which the
Ofcom Board is already familiar.
The organisation of BBC regulatory activities within Ofcom
56. If the decision were taken to pass the full regulatory responsibility for the BBC to
Ofcom, I recognise that this would raise a substantial number of issues for the
Ofcom Board. Whilst they have experience in almost all areas that would pass to
them, the increased responsibilities would be considerable. They would need to
determine how the additional responsibilities were best discharged. I set out
some thoughts below.
57. Content issues. Ofcom and its Content Board have responsibility for the editorial
standards included within the Ofcom Broadcasting Code. The Content Board also
has responsibility for handling complaints in respect of some aspects of the BBC's
work and in respect of all complaints relating to other broadcasters. It seems
likely that adding the full BBC work would more than double the number of
appeals coming to the Board, and they would need to staff the organisation
accordingly.
58. It should be noted that the Content Board is set up as a separate board within
Ofcom by the Communications Act 2003. Its functions are set by the Ofcom Board
but must include "functions in relation to matters that concern the contents of
anything which is or may be broadcast ...."20 The statute requires that the Content
Board be chaired by a member of the main Ofcom Board and that one other
member of the main Board must also be a member. The Ofcom Board appoints
the Content Board, and it includes a number of external members with specific
editorial backgrounds. The Broadcasting Code is published by Ofcom itself, with
advice from the Content Board.
59. Competition issues. Ofcom already has significant responsibilities for
competition issues. It would inherit responsibility from the BBC Trust for the
regulatory elements of Fair Trading, Competition and Distribution activities. These
are important issues which Ofcom already understands and has commented on in
its wider role.

20

Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 1 Functions of OFCOM’, (s.13 (2)(a)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/13

28

60. Review of performance against Operating Licences, including ‘step-in’ rights
and changes to Operating Licences (detailed in Chapter 2). Ofcom would want to
consider where this body of work was done. The regulatory review work in
respect of the Channel 4 Licence, referred to in paragraph 44 above, is done
within the Content Board. It might be possible to expand that Board’s role to
include oversight of the BBC Operating Framework and Licences, as well as
oversight of changes to these Licences. On the other hand, this is a very
considerable piece of work requiring a concentrated focus on the BBC’s
performance; and it might be considered appropriate to establish a separate body
within Ofcom, the ‘BBC Licence Board’, to carry out this detailed work.
61. As commented, the Content Board of Ofcom is established as a separate board.
The idea of placing a specific responsibility within a separate board or committee
of a related organisation also has a precedent in the decision to set up the
Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England. It would have been possible
when it was established in 1997 to have given decision-making responsibility over
monetary policy (previously lying with Government) direct to the Bank of England.
The decision to give the powers to a policy Committee of the Bank gave greater
prominence and transparency to the activity, allowed for the presence of external
members, whilst making it possible for the Committee to be supported by the
Bank’s staff.
62. However the work done by Ofcom in respect of the BBC were organised (whether
in the mainstream of Ofcom’s operations, in the Ofcom Content Board or in a
separate Ofcom ‘BBC Licence Board’) it would be expected that Ofcom would
bring these work streams together in an Annual Report, detailing how it had
discharged its regulatory duties.
63. I would expect any arrangements in respect of a separate board to be along
similar lines to the Ofcom Content Board. It would be important that a separate
board had a clear link back to Ofcom (for example, by the Chair of the board also
sitting on the main Ofcom Board) so that it came under the umbrella of Ofcom. As
noted above, Ofcom would be required to prepare an Annual Report, providing an
overview of how its BBC regulatory duties had been delivered. To set up a
completely independent ring-fenced board, with no link back to the Ofcom Board,
would in practice be to set up a second regulatory body, with the related concerns
set out in this Chapter.

29

Section 4.
The BBC Board
64. There was a general consensus amongst respondents to the Consultation Paper
that the BBC should have a unitary Board. Few elaborated on how this Board
might work, or what its responsibilities would be; most commentators moved
quickly on to their preferred regulatory model for holding the BBC to account.
This Review places considerable emphasis on the responsibilities of the unitary
Board. It will be the quality of the people on the Board, and their ability to deal
with the significant obligations placed upon them, that will determine the future
success of the BBC, to a greater extent than the issue of what regulatory structure
is agreed upon.
65. There are high-level tests that such a re-design of the Board would be expected to
meet:
i.

Does it provide an appropriate governance structure to ensure the BBC
meets the obligations placed on it by the Charter and related documents?

ii.

Does it protect the BBC’s independence?

iii.

Does it uphold the interest of Licence Fee payers, with responsibility for
value for money?

iv.

Does it deal fairly with external commercial and other counterparties?

v.

Does it enable the BBC to remain distinctive and relevant in a fast-moving
world?

66. It would be expected that the Board would follow, as far as is appropriate for a
public sector body, the Combined Code of the Financial Reporting Council.21 This
Code has developed over a considerable period, with periodic reviews including
those by Cadbury (1992), Hampel (1998) and Higgs (2003). The unitary Board
would be established along the following lines:
i.

a Non-Executive Chair;

ii.

a Non-Executive Deputy Chair, who would fulfil the role of Senior
Independent Director as set out in the Combined Code;

21
Financial Reporting Council (2014). The Corporate Governance Code [On-line]. Available at: https://www.frc.org.uk/OurWork/Publications/Corporate-Governance/UK-Corporate-Governance-Code-2014.pdf

30

iii.

a majority of Non-Executive Directors; and

iv.

a small number of Executive Directors, to include the Director General.

67. Collectively the Board would have responsibility for ensuring that the
Corporation’s obligations under the Charter and related documents were met, and
that the interests of Licence Fee payers were also properly met.
68. On this last point, a number of respondents to the Consultation Paper argued that
the Regulator should have responsibility for representing the interests of Licence
Fee payers. The Regulator would have an important responsibility in this area, but
the responsibility would be one of oversight, that the job were being done
properly. As argued already in this Review, the primary responsibility for the
interests of Licence Fee payers should lie squarely with the BBC Board.
69. The Board would also be accountable to Parliament. It would be required to lay
its Report and Accounts before Parliament, and the Report would need to give a
full analysis of how the Board had met its obligations. It must be expected that the
Chair and Director General of the BBC, and other members of the Board as
necessary, would be answerable to Parliamentary Committees.
70. As noted above, the BBC Report and Accounts would need to give a full analysis
of how the Board had met its obligations. I would expect it to include the
following reports:
i.

a Report from the Audit Committee, responsible for ensuring that the
financial information was accurate and that financial control and risk
systems were robust. In addition to financial information and control
systems, the Committee should keep under review some of the wider
value for money issues that have been dealt with recently by the BBC
Trust;

ii.

a Report from the Remuneration Committee, responsible for determining
appropriate levels of remuneration of Executive Directors and other senior
executives of the Corporation;

iii.

a Report from the Nominations Committee, responsible for making
senior appointments to the Corporation and for oversight of succession
planning.
31

The Annual Report and Accounts would have a report from each of the above
Committees, setting out the work that had been done during the year. There are
other areas of activity which, whether the work is done in a committee or in the full
Board, would need to be covered in the Annual Accounts through a written report.
iv.

A Report on Operating Framework and Licences performance. The
Annual Report should include a review by the BBC of its performance
against the agreed Operating Framework and Licences, as detailed in
Chapter 2. It needs to be agreed by the Board, as a transparent record of
what has gone well, and what has gone less well and needs improvement.
It needs to be balanced. Awarding itself full marks on each occasion
would increase, rather than reduce, the pressure on the Corporation;

v.

a Report on Editorial and Complaints issues. This report should cover
the work the Board has done in reviewing Editorial Standards, and in
particular any changes it has made to the BBC Editorial Guidelines. The
report should also deal with complaints against the BBC, covering:
● the number of complaints, by broad heading;
● the speed with which they had been dealt with, against preagreed targets; and
● the number of complaints appealed to the Regulator.
The Report should also cover a commentary on what the Board had learnt
from the complaints experience and any proposed changes to the system.
As discussed further in Chapter 4, the Regulator would take a keen
interest in editorial matters, but the primary responsibility for upholding
editorial independence and the high editorial standards of the BBC would
rest with the unitary Board;

vi.

a Report on the BBC’s Distribution activities. An increasingly important
part of the BBC’s activities is the manner in which the BBC makes its
content available through the internet and through other parties’
distribution platforms (for example, a Sky platform). The BBC Trust’s
paper of October 201522 sets out a distribution framework for the BBC. It
requires the BBC to publish on a regular basis its compliance with the
Framework and detail relevant expenditures. Even if the Framework were

22
BBC Trust (2015). Distribution Framework for BBC Services [On-line]. Available at:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/our_work/distribution_framework/2015/distribution_framework.pdf

32

amended as part of Charter Renewal, the obligation on the BBC Board to
report on its performance in this area should remain;
vii.

a Report on Competition and Fair Trading issues. This report should
cover the work done by the Board in ensuring that it maintains a proper
structural separation between its commercial and public service activities
and its dealings with the commercial sector. The BBC carries out most of
its commercial business within BBC Worldwide, and it should report
transparently on these activities. A Fair Trading Committee already exists
as part of the BBC Executive arrangements and needs to be continued.
The BBC is under special obligations in relation to its conduct in the
markets in which it operates. The BBC’s funding means it must comply
with European State Aid Law; and the BBC is also subject to UK and
European Competition Law; and

viii.

a Report on the BBC’s Consultation and Out-reach programme. The
Charter should place on the Board responsibilities to communicate and
take into account the views of the BBC’s audience, both generally and in
respect of the regions and Nations of the UK. These obligations are
discussed in Chapter 3. The Board’s Report should cover its work in this
area.

71. As noted, it is for the Board to consider which of the work streams set out in (iv) to
(viii) above should be done in Committee and which in the full Board. Even if done
in the full Board, it is proposed that one Non-Executive Director should be
identified with each work stream and should sign the related Report that appears
as part of the BBC’s Annual Report and Accounts.
72. It is clear that the responsibilities placed upon the Non-Executives of the BBC
would be considerable. They need to be selected with care, ensuring that those
chosen have the range of skills, including knowledge of the creative industries,
necessary for the specialist review work, but also the experience to contribute to
the unitary Board as a whole. In certain specialist areas, for example Editorial and
Complaint issues, the Non-Executive identified to lead the work would need to
have recognised skills in the subject.
73. I would expect the time commitment for Non-Executive Directors to be
considerable, far greater than the time spent by the existing Non-Executives on
the BBC Executive Board, and similar to the time being spent by a number of the
BBC Trustees.
33

Appointments to the Board
74. A considerable amount of attention will be paid to where responsibility lies for
appointments to the Board.
75. The majority of respondents to the Consultation Paper who covered governance
issues stressed the importance of the BBC being independent of the Government,
and seen as such both in the UK and overseas.
76. A number of respondents argued that appointment of the Chair should be made
by the Regulator, since this would signal clearly that the candidate selected was
independent of Government. In general, notwithstanding the Channel 4
precedent23, it would be considered unusual practice for a Regulator to have the
lead role in selecting a candidate to lead the Board of a regulated entity, because
of the conflict that arises when regulators are required to make a judgement about
the quality of the regulatee’s management and its capacity to carry out its
responsibilities. On the other hand it is quite usual for the Regulator to have an
involvement with the selection process. In the financial services sector, the Board
of a major company, having made its choice, is required to submit the name to the
regulator who would confirm or not the candidate's suitability.
77. For the reasons set out above, I do not recommend appointment of the Chair by
the Regulator. Nor do I recommend appointment by the Board. An appointment
by the Board, even with the assistance of an outside assessor, would be likely to
attract criticism that the Board had appointed ‘one of their own’.
78. If appointment by the Regulator and appointment by the Board are both rejected,
the choice lies between: (i) a specially devised system which is independent in all
respects; and (ii) appointment by the Government, subject to certain safeguards.
79. A number of respondents argued the case for the appointment to be entirely
independent of Government, and drew my attention to the appointment of the
Chair of the Recognition Panel for self-regulation of the Press. On this model a
small independent appointments committee would be established by the
Commissioner of Public Appointments. The Committee would be expected to
follow a transparent process to determine a short list and, following interview, to
agree on one candidate. The final decision would rest with this independent
Committee.
23

The Chair of Channel 4 is appointed by Ofcom, subject to approval by the Secretary of State.

34

80. If this process were followed, the individual chosen would still be subject to a
confirmatory hearing by the CMS Parliamentary Committee to determine
suitability. Whilst the appointment would be independent of Government, the
candidate would have, and should recognise, a responsibility to Parliament.
81. If the Government decided it wished to retain the right to appoint the Chair, then it
would follow the process that has become established and which includes a
number of safeguards. It would, with the assistance of the Commissioner of Public
Appointments, appoint a committee to review candidates. This Committee would
advertise and, following consultation with appropriate parties and interview, put
forward a very short list of appointable candidates to Ministers, with whom the
final decision would rest. The proposed candidate would appear before the CMS
Parliamentary Committee who would consider suitability.
82. I would propose that the process chosen for appointing the Chair should also
apply to the Deputy Chair.
83. Turning to the appointment of Non-Executives, the BBC Trust is required by the
current Charter to have one member designated for each of the constituent
Nations of the United Kingdom: England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Each person so designated is required to be suitably qualified by virtue of their
“knowledge of the culture, characteristics and affairs of the people in the nation”
and their “close touch with opinion in that nation”.24 The current practice is for
those who apply to be shortlisted and interviewed. The interview panel is chaired
by a senior civil servant from DCMS and also includes an independent assessor,
an assessor from the Nation itself and the BBC Chair. The recommendation is then
passed to Ministers.
84. A number of commentators argued that, whilst the Non-Executive Directors of the
BBC needed to be chosen so as to achieve an appropriately diverse Board, there
should not be specific representatives for Nations, or indeed for any demographic
such as age or ethnic background. They argued that it should be the duty of
Directors to represent all Licence Fee payers, not some, and to act collectively in
the public interest. It is a legitimate argument but the precedent of having
representatives on the sovereign board of the BBC for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland has been in place since 1952 and has provided an important link
between the BBC and the Nations it serves.
24
Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). The Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation
(s.14 (3)) [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf

35

85. I propose that the current practice of having members for the constituent Nations
of the UK should remain in place, alongside the existing process for their
selection. Those chosen will need to be able to balance their representative role
with their legal duty under the Charter to serve the BBC as a whole; and given the
need to limit the size of the Board they will need to bring specific skills to
complement the skills of others. For this reason the Chair of the BBC, who would
carry the primary responsibility for ensuring that the balance of skills on the Board
was appropriate, needs to have a direct involvement in the selection process.
86. I propose that the other Non-Executives be appointed by the BBC Board, the
appointments to be led by the Nominations Committee. It will be particularly
important that these appointments are of suitable candidates with the balance of
skills to deal with the significant responsibilities placed upon them.
87. I propose that the appointment of the Director General, and any other Executives
appointed to the Board, be made by the Board, led by the Nominations
Committee.
Size of the Board
88. The Board needs to represent as best it can the diversity of the public it serves.
As noted, it also needs to include the necessary skills to carry out the specialist
Board functions referred to above. I think it unlikely that these objectives could be
met in a Board of fewer than 12; and I counsel against a Board larger than 14, on
the grounds that above this number it is hard to operate as an effective group in
which all members feel engaged and responsible.
89. I propose that some latitude be granted in the Charter to the Chair to determine
the final size of the Board, but I would expect it to look broadly as follows:
●
●
●
●

Chair;
Deputy Chair;
4–5 Independent Non-Executive Directors with relevant skills
4 Non-Executive Directors for the constituent Nations of the UK, who
would also contribute with other relevant skills; and
● 2–3 Executive Directors.
90. If Government chose to continue the right to appoint the Chair, Deputy Chair and
the Non-Executive Directors for the Nations, with other Directors being appointed
36

by the Nominations Committee of the Board, half the Board or slightly above half
would be appointed independently. Once appointed, all Directors must act in the
best interests of the BBC to meet the Public Purposes set for the Corporation in
the Charter and to uphold the BBC's editorial independence.
Term of Appointment
91. There is a lot of literature about the optimum term for Non-Executives. At present
BBC Trust members are appointed under the Charter for five years, with the
possibility of renewal for a further term. There is a move towards shorter terms for
Directors, and the Combined Code comments that “any term beyond six years
(e.g. two three-year terms) for a Non-Executive Director should be subject to
particularly rigorous review.”25 My view is that it may take time for new NonExecutive Directors to understand how the BBC functions and, therefore, I would
be against very short terms. My proposal would be a period of four years, with the
ability to renew for a further four.
92. The initial appointments of the Chair, Deputy Chair and Non-Executive Directors in
respect of their term needs to be phased to ensure that not all will come up for
renewal or retirement at the same stage.
Remuneration
93. I propose that the remuneration of the Chair, Deputy Chair and all Non-Executives
should be set by the Secretary of State at the DCMS. The remuneration of
Executive Directors would be set by the Remuneration Committee of the Board.

Section 5.
Conclusions on Governance and Regulatory Models
In respect of the Trust
94. I conclude that the current BBC Trust model is flawed:
i.

it conflates governance and regulatory functions within the Trust, which
leads to confusion about the Trust's role; and

25

Financial Reporting Council, (2008). Section 1 Companies (A7.2) in The Combined Code on Corporate Governance [On-line].
Available at: https://www.frc.org.uk/getattachment/1a875db9-b06e-4453-8f65-358809084331/The-Combined-Code-on-CorporateGoverance.aspx

37

ii.

in its governance mode, the BBC operates a two-tier Board structure
which leads to confused responsibilities.

95. I conclude that regulatory functions should be in a body that is independent of the
BBC. A clear distinction between the Corporation, which needs to comply with
the regulatory obligations placed upon it, and the regulator itself, would provide
greater transparency about roles and would be in the public interest.
In respect of the OfBeeb model
96. OfBeeb would provide the necessary split between governance and regulatory
functions.
97. It would ensure a separate regulator, able to focus on the specialised activities of
the BBC. The different expectations of BBC audiences, and the differences
compared with other broadcasters in areas such as Service Licences and editorial
standards, could be overseen by the bespoke regulator.
98. There are different views about the precise regulatory powers OfBeeb should have
and its exact relationship with Ofcom. In particular there are issues about whether
oversight of editorial matters, and the hearing of editorial appeals, should move to
Ofcom, which has considerable experience in these areas, or be given to OfBeeb.
In whatever manner this issue was settled, it is clear that regulatory oversight of
the market issues around partnerships and competition would need to remain with
Ofcom.
99. I conclude that OfBeeb, as a bespoke regulator for the BBC, is to be preferred to
the current BBC Trust arrangements.
In respect of the Ofcom model
100. Ofcom is already the public service regulator for the United Kingdom’s
communications industry and already has regulatory powers in respect of the
BBC. There needs to be a very strong argument for setting up a second public
service regulator.
101. There are other arguments in favour of the Ofcom model:

38

i.

Ofcom has considerable experience in all the areas that are important in
the regulation of the BBC. They include, in addition to competition issues,
programme content, editorial standards and complaints;

ii.

Ofcom is a flexible regulator: it does not treat all broadcasters alike. In its
editorial and complaints function, it has the capacity to take into account
audience expectations;

iii.

Ofcom has scale and credibility. It has considerable resources. It would
be a strong regulator to match a strong BBC unitary Board;

iv.

Ofcom has the capacity to look at the BBC in the context of the market as
a whole. Current trends will bring the BBC into greater
contact/competition with commercial players, and this argues for a
regulator with a wide knowledge of the broadcasting industry; and

v.

bringing the regulatory oversight of the BBC under one roof obviates the
need for an MOU in respect of regulatory functions, and would have
operational efficiencies.

In respect of the choice between the OfBeeb model and the Ofcom model
102. The Consultation Paper suggested that the choice of models, if the Trust model
were not retained, lay between regulation by OfBeeb and regulation by Ofcom. In
fact the choice lies between regulation by OfBeeb and Ofcom, and regulation by
Ofcom alone. Nobody argues that the market and competition issues should be
dealt with by anyone other than Ofcom.
103. A number of commentators referred to the uncertainty that would follow if
regulation of the BBC passed to Ofcom. There must be some uncertainty,
although the manner in which Ofcom has conducted itself, and the respect it has
engendered from a wide community, suggests the concern should not be
overstated. There must also be uncertainty about how OfBeeb would operate.
104. An assumption made by some advocates of the OfBeeb model is that the BBC
Trust could morph into OfBeeb: the existing signage around its office might
change, it might find house room with some other organisation, but the team
could continue to work as before. This over-simplifies the transition that would be
involved. In the first place the Trust’s governance work, looking at the BBC
budgets and strategic direction, would pass to the BBC unitary Board. Much of
39

its out-reach work to engage audiences would also transfer to the BBC. Further,
as a new public sector regulator, a new Board would be appointed and, whilst it
would hopefully have some continuity with the current Trust Board, this cannot be
guaranteed. The precise size of OfBeeb would depend on what regulatory
functions were left with it. At present the Trust employs a little over 60 in number.
The majority of the work is regulatory, but some of the team are involved in
governance issues which would not remain. If, as the CMS Select Committee
Report of February 2015 suggested, content regulation were passed to Ofcom,
the number of staff left would be very small indeed. Even if OfBeeb retained more
regulatory work, there must be doubt as to whether it would have the necessary
scale. It would have the ability to supplement its resources from outside, but no
regulator should be over-dependent on external consultants.
105. The current MOU between the Trust and Ofcom, which would need to be
replicated in some manner in the OfBeeb model, serves as a reminder of the
significant number of areas in which there are overlapping responsibilities. The
overlaps in the complaints area between the Trust and Ofcom, discussed further in
Chapter 4, are confusing. There would be considerable merit in consolidating the
complaints appeal system within one body, Ofcom.
106. The benefits of having the regulation of the BBC within one regulator, rather than
split between two, is that it avoids these issues of overlaps and gaps. Just as
there is a strong argument for a single BBC Board, making clear where
governance responsibilities lie, so there is a strong argument for a single regulator,
making clear where regulatory responsibilities rest.
107. Clear responsibilities are necessary for clear accountability. As noted earlier in this
Chapter, accountability should be thought of not as a function separate from
governance and regulation, but as an inherent part of a good governance and
regulatory system. The Board of the BBC must act to meet the obligations placed
on it by the new Charter and Agreement; beyond its accountability to the
Regulator, it is accountable to Parliament and to the Licence Fee payer. Ofcom
must act in accordance with its statutory duties, which include the duty to “further
the interests of citizens”26; it too is accountable to Parliament. Introducing a
second public service regulator, OfBeeb, would create a new three-way
relationship, to replace the existing one between the BBC Executive, the BBC
Trust and Ofcom. As three-way relationships often do, this is likely to confuse
rather than clarify where responsibilities lie.
26
Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 1 The Functions of OFCOM’ (s.3 (1)(a)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/3

40

108. I conclude that the arguments for consolidating regulation of the BBC within
Ofcom heavily outweigh the benefits of any OfBeeb model.
109. If the recommendation of the Review to adopt the Ofcom model were accepted,
there would need to be a further discussion about how the transferred
responsibilities should be dealt with: which activities could be done in existing
Ofcom teams and which might best be done in a separate board within Ofcom.
Any new board would need to have a clear link to the Ofcom Board, similar to the
Ofcom Content Board
In respect of the BBC Board
110. I conclude that the BBC, responsible for its own governance but not for regulatory
functions, should have a unitary Board. It would consist of a Non-Executive Chair
and Deputy Chair, a majority of Non-Executive Directors and a small number of
Executive Directors.
111. The primary responsibility for the interests of Licence Fee payers must lie with the
unitary Board. The Board would need to demonstrate how it had met these
responsibilities. The Regulator would have oversight of the BBC in this respect,
but it is a key principle of this Review that the responsibility to the Licence Fee
payer should rest with the BBC direct, not via whatever regulatory system is
decided upon.
112. As part of the transparent reporting on its activities, the Annual Report and
Accounts of the BBC must give a full account of its activities and how it had met
its regulatory obligations. It should include:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.

a report on Audit and Risk matters;
a report on Remuneration issues;
a report on Nomination issues;
a report on Operating Framework and Licences performance;
a report on Editorial and Complaints issues;
a report on Distribution activities;
a report on Competition issues and Fair Trading activities; and
a report on the BBC's Consultation and Out-reach programme.

113. I propose that the existing system within the BBC Trust of a designated Director
for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland should be continued within the
unitary Board.
41

114. I set out proposals for the size of the Board and how appointments should be
made. I propose a Board which would be in part appointed by Government and in
part appointed independently via the Nominations Committee.
In respect of the overall governance and regulatory model
115. The model proposed in this Chapter in respect of governance and regulation
meets the criteria set out in paragraph 8. It achieves a clear split between
governance and regulatory functions. The proposal that all regulation of the BBC
should be consolidated within Ofcom makes clear where these regulatory duties
lie. Ofcom's oversight of the BBC places it in the right position to provide
protection to those outside the Corporation in respect of competition issues. The
unitary Board distinguishes between Executive and Non-Executive roles; and the
obligations on the unitary Board, and requirements in particular in respect of
reporting obligations, are clearly laid out. The model allows a direct line of
accountability between the BBC and the Licence Fee payer who funds it.

42

CHAPTER 2: MECHANISMS OF GOVERNANCE AND REGULATION

Introduction
1.

The mechanisms that any governing or regulatory body has at its disposal are
crucial to that body’s effectiveness. The 2007 Charter and Agreement set out a
number of these mechanisms specific to the BBC, notably Service Licences and
Public Value Tests, which sit within the context of existing mechanisms such as
content quotas.

2.

This Chapter looks at these mechanisms of governance and regulation in relation
to the delivery of the Public Purposes of the BBC: the way in which the public
interest is balanced against its market impact and the manner in which the
overarching public value is maximised. Section 1 describes the current structure;
Section 2 makes suggestions for reform of the current structure of documents;
Section 3 sets out proposals of reform to the current process for making changes;
and Section 4 sets out conclusions.

3.

Most consider the current regime to be an improvement upon the position before
2007 under the Governors that included the Secretary of State approving major
changes to services. The Trust has increased the independence of regulation of
the BBC. The Service Licence regime has increased the transparency of decisionmaking around changes to services, held the BBC to account for its delivery
against Public Purposes and limited the potential negative market impact through
Market Impact Assessments. But the model has also been criticised for, on
occasion, failing to be sufficiently rigorous in holding the BBC to account; and, on
other occasions, being too inflexible and stymying the BBC’s ability to move
quickly.

4.

Many criticisms of the current Service Licence regime stem from the current Trust
model. The fact that many of the regulatory functions sit within the BBC Trust,
which is part of the BBC, leads to the perception of the BBC Trust being
conflicted. The clarity of a unitary Board and single independent regulator, as set
out in Chapter 1, will make the roles and responsibilities more straightforward.

43

5.

Improving the mechanisms of governance and regulation should aim to deliver a
number of outcomes. The success of any changes should be measured against
the following objectives for the regime:
i.

support the output of the BBC: it should support the BBC in continuing
to deliver creative and distinctive content;

ii.

support the Public Purposes: it should support the BBC in delivering
against its Public Purposes;

iii.

citizens and consumers: it should make sure that the public, and
particularly those who pay for and use the BBC’s services, understand
what they can expect and have their interests effectively represented;

iv.

industry, competitors and partners: it should give sufficient certainty to
industry about the scope of the BBC’s activities and protect them against
undue adverse market impact; and

v.

transparency and accountability: the BBC should be duly open and
accountable with appropriate consultation and transparency of decisionmaking, particularly in relation to managing change which should take due
account of the interests of audiences, Licence Fee payers, citizens and the
market impact.

Section 1.
Current Structures
6.

The current system of obligations and requirements for the BBC is complicated.
There are three key parties involved: the BBC Executive, the BBC Trust and
Ofcom. Their roles in relation to these obligations are set out variously in the
Charter and Agreement, in legislation and in related documents.

7.

The Service Licence regime is part of a wider system of obligations and
responsibilities set out in statute, regulations, through the Charter and by the BBC
itself. The key elements are:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

Public Purposes (paragraph 9);
Purpose Remits (paragraph 10);
Statutory Quotas (paragraph 11);
Service Licences (paragraphs 12-16);
44

v.
vi.
vii.

Statements of Programme Policy (paragraph 17);
BBC Workplan (paragraph 18); and
Frameworks and other documents (paragraphs 19-20).

8.

In accordance with the Terms of Reference, this Review looks at the way in which
these different obligations are set, measured, reported and regulated. It does not
comment on what the specific content of these regulations should be, nor the level
at which any given obligation should be set.

9.

Public Purposes. The current Charter sets out the high-level objectives of the
BBC through the ‘Public Purposes’. The Charter states that “The BBC’s main
object is the promotion of its Public Purposes.”27 The BBC Trust has both
governance and regulatory functions in relation to these purposes. Options for
reforming the Public Purposes are being considered by the Government and
therefore may change as part of Charter Review. The current Purposes are:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

sustaining citizenship and civil society;
promoting education and learning;
stimulating creativity and cultural excellence;
representing the UK, its Nations, regions and communities;
bringing the UK to the world and the world to the UK; and
in promoting its other purposes, helping to deliver to the public the benefit
of emerging communications technologies and services and, in addition,
taking a leading role in the switchover to digital television.

10. Purpose Remits. The BBC Trust sets purpose remits and performance criteria,
based on the Public Purposes, that go into more detail about what the BBC
should be doing to deliver them. It is the responsibility of the BBC Executive to
deliver to these purpose remits, with the BBC Trust holding the Executive to
account for its delivery. For example, under the purpose ‘sustaining citizenship
and civil society’, the remit includes requirements for the BBC to: provide
independent journalism; engage a wide audience in news, current affairs and other
topical issues; encourage and enable conversation and debate about news,
current affairs and topical issues; build greater understanding of the parliamentary
process and political institutions governing the UK; and enable audiences to
access, understand and interact with different types of media.28
27

Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation (s.
3(2)). [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf
28

BBC Trust (2013), Purpose Remits [On-line]. Available at:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/purpose_remits/2013/purpose_remits.pdf

45

11. Statutory Quotas. The statutory quotas, also referred to as ‘tier 2’ regulations,
set the minimum level of output for certain programmes such as news and types
of production, for example ‘out of London’ production.29 The quotas are set out in
the Communications Act 200330 and are the regulatory responsibility of Ofcom. As
statutory obligations these quotas can only be changed by Parliament, or as
specified in the legislation. The BBC reports its performance against these quotas
in its Annual Report. Ofcom reviews and reports on compliance with these
obligations annually.
12. Service Licences. Service Licences are set by the BBC Trust, and provide the
framework for each of the BBC’s services. They were introduced in the 2007
Charter and the BBC Trust last reviewed the approach in 2012.31
13. There are currently 26 Service Licences in total, comprising 9 BBC television
services and 16 BBC radio services, as well as a Licence for the ‘online and red
button service’ which includes the iPlayer. Each Service Licence is bespoke, but
has the same framework and characteristics. The latest Service Licences, issued
in 2014, include:
● remit: the kind of service being provided and target audience, setting the
parameters for activity;
● scope: practical information about distribution;
● budget: an annual budget for the service;
● aims and objectives: a high-level qualitative direction given to the service;
● contribution to public value: a breakdown of objectives by public purpose.
These are primarily qualitative but contain some quantitative elements;
● performance measurement framework: a short statement, consistent for
all services, that says assessment metrics will be based on quality, reach,
impact and value for money; and
● statutory commitments: where applicable, the Service Licence sets out
any statutory quotas the service is required to meet.
14. As the list above shows, the Service Licences currently fulfil a number of different
functions which could be either a function of governance or of regulation. This
reflects the BBC Trust’s combined role to provide both governance and regulatory
29

Tier 1 regulations are those relating to the Ofcom Broadcasting Code, setting standards in relation to harm and offence and
impartiality.
30

Communications Act (2003). ‘Part 3 Television and Radio Services’ (s. 277–278) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/part/3
31
BBC Trust (2012), BBC Trust Review of Service Licences. [On-line]. Available from:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/our_work/review_service_licences/final_conclusions.pdf

46

functions, and the fact that these Licences are one of the central connections
between the BBC Trust and Executive. In setting the high level strategic
objectives and the budget for each of the BBC’s services, the Licences can be
seen as a tool of governance. In defining the activities of a service, and in setting
out the metrics against which the BBC is held to account for its performance, they
can be seen as a tool of regulation. Both of these elements are important and
contribute to the increased transparency and clarity with which the current
arrangements have been credited.
15. As a regulatory function the BBC Trust monitors compliance and performance
against the Service Licences, based in part on data provided by the BBC
Executive. In addition to listing the statutory quotas, the Service Licences include
quantitative quotas which are not statutory. The BBC Trust has a range of
sanctions at its disposal, from public comment to a full-scale review of the service.
The Trust can also require the Executive Board to look at management of a given
service.
16. The BBC Trust is also required to undertake a full review of services at least once
every five years. These reviews provide an opportunity to look at the service in the
round and include consultation with the public and industry, the consideration of
evidence, and market impact. The BBC Trust can instigate a review at any time it
considers necessary.
17. Statements of Programme Policy. The BBC Executive is required to prepare
annual Statements of Programme Policy (SoPPs) that set out the way in which the
objectives in the Service Licences will be delivered. These are then approved by
the Trust. These SoPPs provide a greater level of detail than in Service Licences,
setting out how the BBC Executive will deliver its objectives.
18. BBC Workplan. In addition to these public documents required by the Charter
and Agreement there are a range of other documents that contribute to the overall
framework of transparency and accountability. The BBC Executive publishes a
range of information through its Annual Report, and more recently in its annual
corporate Workplan, which now includes the SoPPs.
19. Frameworks and other documents. The BBC Trust also publishes and
maintains a range of other documents that provide the overall framework of
governance, regulation and accountability for the BBC across its different
activities. As with the BBC Executive, it publishes a Workplan that sets out its

47

forward plan for the coming year. It also publishes the protocols for how it
delivers its functions.
20. The Trust also publishes important documents about how the BBC will operate;
some of these are required under the Charter and Agreement, others are
published on its own initiative. This includes the Commercial Framework which
sets out how the Trust oversees and assesses the BBC’s commercial activities;
and a Fair Trading Framework which sets the policies on fair trading and
competitive impact that the BBC is required to comply with. A Distribution
Framework was introduced in 2015 that sets out the principles for the BBC in
issues of content distribution.
21. This system has a number of benefits, providing a set of public statements about
what the BBC provides, what it should be trying to achieve at a service level, and
how taken together these deliver the Public Purposes overall. It also provides a
framework for assessment of performance. However, there have been concerns
raised that suggest reforms would be helpful to improve the system and to make
sure it remains appropriate in the future. These are set out in the rest of this
Chapter.
Current Process for Changes to Service Licences
22. Changes to Service Licences are the responsibility of the BBC Trust. The BBC
Executive is able to make proposals to the BBC Trust, but it is for the Trust to
determine whether a change is permitted. The current Agreement sets out in great
detail the process by which such changes are assessed and the basis on which
they are approved.
23. The judgement of whether a change to a service requires a full Public Value Test
(PVT) is the responsibility of the BBC Trust. The framework for this is set out in
Section 25 of the current Agreement and is known as the ‘significance test’. The
test is required to take into account the impact, financial implications, novelty and
duration of the change. There are other additional ‘significance’ requirements set
out in the Service Licences.
24. The Trust is required under the Agreement to undertake such investigations as it
considers necessary in the consideration of the ‘significance’ of any change. In
practice this is an internal desk-based activity undertaken by the Trust. Whilst
there is no formal requirement to do so, in recent years the Trust has also asked

48

Ofcom for advice on the potential impact of changes. The outcome of a
‘significance’ test is published by the Trust.
25. Where a change is considered ‘significant’, a full PVT is triggered. This is made up
of two parts: a Public Value Assessment (PVA), conducted by the Trust, and a
Market Impact Assessment (MIA), conducted by Ofcom. The BBC has concluded
a number of PVTs over the last Charter period looking at On-demand TV, HD TV,
Gaelic Digital Service, Local Video, moving BBC3 on-line and the creation of a
new BBC One +1 service.
26. The PVA, conducted by the Trust, looks to establish the value that is added by the
proposed change in terms of the benefit to individual consumers and society, as
well as assessing the value for money of the proposal. In support of this activity
the Trust consults with audiences and stakeholders and has often chosen to
undertake additional research to support its analysis.
27. The MIA is conducted through a joint steering group. The members of this group
are taken from the Trust and Ofcom in equal numbers. The time limit for the MIA
is set at three months. Ofcom has the final judgement in the recommendation in
relation to the Market Impact, which it is uniquely qualified to provide as the
converged regulator for the broadcasting and telecoms industries.
28. The PVT takes into account both the PVA and MIA, and the Trust makes the
determination of whether a proposal should be permitted, taking into account both
elements. The Trust is required to publish its provisional conclusions for
consultation before concluding whether a proposed change is permitted.
29. The current Agreement sets out in Section 27 a time limit of six months for the
conduct of a PVT, permitting a longer process at the discretion of the Trust. In
practice the time it has taken from the initial announcement of a new service from
the BBC to a final decision from the Trust has often been far in excess of six
months. One recent example is the move of BBC Three from linear to on-line.
This was first announced in March 2014, with a PVT application submitted in
December 2014, and the final decision made in November 2015.
30. Under the existing Agreement the BBC is also able to run pilots and trials for new
services. These are divided into two categories. Category 1 trials are those
deemed to be strategically significant, which are designed to produce evidence for
a PVT. These require approval from the BBC Trust. Category 2 trials are lower
level and are authorised by the BBC Executive.
49

31. This process for approving changes is generally considered a significant step
forward. Prior to the 2007 Charter the responsibility for approving proposals for
new services fell to the Government and there was no formal process. In the
context of expanding digital services, the PVT mechanism provides clarity and
independence from Government. The requirements for consultation,
transparency, and independent assessment of market impact have been broadly
welcomed. However, there are some elements of the process that cause concern
in terms of flexibility and the impact of a lengthy process, and reform is required to
resolve these.

Section 2.
Reforms to the Structure of Documents
32. The Service Licences are one of the key tools for holding the BBC to account. In a
new model there must remain a structure, similar to the Service Licences currently
issued by the Trust, which sets the scope for the BBC’s activities and their key
delivery objectives in a transparent and accessible way. The success of any new
model will be measured in part by the extent to which it increases the
accountability of the BBC.
33. Service Licences have broadly reflected the operation of the BBC, and the fact
that the majority of BBC content remains based around linear services. It is not
clear that this regime has the flexibility to keep pace with the way that the
organisation of the BBC is changing. Both the governance and regulatory tools
will need to have the flexibility to adapt to changing technologies and audience
expectations.
34. As part of the current structure there are also a range of documents such as
frameworks, protocols and policies that set out at various levels what is required
and being delivered by the BBC. It would be helpful to consolidate these into a
smaller set of documents to provide greater clarity for audiences and the market
alike. I set out in Box A a proposed documentary framework, distinguishing
between those documents which would be the prime responsibility of Ofcom, and
those which would be the prime responsibility of the unitary Board, alongside
those that Government is responsible for.
35. The current Service Licences contain a range of both qualitative and quantitative
information. While both of these elements would be needed in any future regime,
50

the more they could include clear metrics and quantitative information, the more
objective would be the measures against which performance and compliance
could be assessed.
36. The current system also suffers from having three organisations with some degree
of overlap in their responsibilities, an issue set out in Chapter 1 of this Review.
Looking solely at these issues, the advantages of a single regulator, rather than
two, is considerable. Under a model that had a unitary Board with responsibility in
the first instance for delivering public value, and a single regulator with
responsibility for oversight and scrutiny in the public interest, the way in which
these responsibilities were shared could be simplified and streamlined.
Box A: Key Elements of Proposed Regime

Forward
Looking

Government

Ofcom

BBC

Charter and
Agreement: set the
Public Purposes and
the structures of
governance and
regulation.

Operating Framework: the overall
framework within which the BBC
operates, issued by Ofcom. Includes
frameworks for competition.

Workplan and
Creative Remits:
the unitary Board
sets out in advance
how it will deliver
its Operating
Licences and
associated
budgets.

Legislation: relevant
Acts that set
statutory obligations
such as quotas.

Reporting

Operating Licences: part of the
Operating Framework, issued by
Ofcom, set out in detail the obligations
placed on the BBC’s activities.

Annual Report: provides an annual
overview of how the regulatory duties
have been delivered, including review
of BBC delivery against metrics in
Operating Licences.
Performance Reviews: Ofcom to
review BBC performance, Framework
and Licences in detail at least once
every four years, able to focus on any
issues that it believes requires
attention.

Annual Report
and Accounts:
provides a review
of performance by
the unitary Board,
including metrics
for how they have
delivered against
their objectives.

Regulatory Documents
37. Ofcom should have responsibility for a new document, the BBC’s Operating
Framework. This document would set out the regulatory framework for the
51

BBC’s operational delivery, covering all its activities. This would include the
relevant regulatory elements within existing documentation, such as the ‘Fair
Trading Policies and Framework’, ‘Purpose Remits’, and ‘Distribution Framework’
that the Trust has developed over the past decade.
38. There are a number of significant regulatory issues, particularly in the area of
competition, which will be increasingly important over the next Charter period.
These include issues around the BBC’s commercial activities, such as transfer
pricing arrangements and distribution. The Operating Framework would be
expected to set out the obligations for the BBC in regard to state aid and
competition policy, as well as the principles for how appropriate separation of the
BBC’s commercial activities from the core of the Corporation is to be achieved.
39. Flowing from the Operating Framework, and associated with it, there must be
Operating Licences for the BBC services. These Operating Licences must set out
at a reasonably high level the framework of objectives and obligations for the
BBC’s output and the quotas and metrics against which the performance would
be measured.
40. In setting the Operating Licences there is a trade-off that needs to be struck in
terms of the level of detail they include. They must give the BBC the flexibility that
a creative organisation requires to be able to continue to surprise and delight
audiences, whilst holding it to account for its output and the way it spends the
Licence Fee. Ofcom currently provides licences for the Channel 3 licensees and
Channel 4. These licences do not contain as much information as the current
BBC Service Licences. Given its unique funding model, the high standards the
public expects, and the obligations placed upon it by the Charter and Agreement,
the BBC’s Operating Licences would need to look considerably different, including
more detail and some of the key metrics that have been introduced through the
current regime. They would need to set out the measurable objectives of the
BBC’s output within a particular area of BBC activity and any requirements about
such content set out in the Charter (such as quality or distinctiveness). They
would also need to explain how the BBC’s output contributes to the Public
Purposes, as well as including any relevant statutory commitments and quotas.
41. Operating Licences would differ from the existing Service Licences in two key
ways. First, in moving the scope away from licences based on channels and
stations, Operating Licences could cover areas in a way that was designed to
support accountability and effective regulation. Instead of needing 26 Service
Licences, as at present, Operating Licences could group services (e.g. grouping
52

TV with obligations for BBC1 and BBC2 included within one document) or they
could cover genres such as children’s programmes, drama or news which have
particular public interest. It would also allow the Licences to change to reflect the
structures within the BBC, making it easier to identify how decisions were made in
the interests of delivering against the Licences. Such an approach would be likely
to lead to a smaller number of Licences that give a clearer statement of the
obligations placed on the BBC’s activities.
42. This approach could also allow a Licence for each of the Nations of the UK.
Setting out in a single Licence the combination of obligations the BBC has for a
given area would make it easier to hold the BBC to account for its delivery in that
area in an open and transparent way. This may require a ‘matrix’ approach, with
obligations present in other Operating Licences being repeated in those for the
Nations. This would contribute to an overall package of measures that increase
accountability to the constituent Nations of the UK, as also noted in paragraph 34
of Chapter 3.
43. This proposal would also have the benefit of Operating Licences being able to
reflect technological changes more easily. It is quite possible that in the future
distinguishing output largely by linear channel or station will become less useful
for regulatory purposes. Operating Licences would be able to have their scope set
in the way most appropriate for achieving accountability, rather than being tied to
the structure of specific services.
44. The second way in which the Operating Licences would be different from the
Service Licences is in moving towards a more clearly regulatory document. This
means that they should have a greater focus on measurable quantitative
obligations that specify the desired outputs and outcomes, rather than the more
qualitative approach of the existing Service Licences. The Operating Licences
would need to include the statutory quotas the BBC must meet, and would be
expected to include other metrics about the BBC’s output that are based around
the key objectives set in the Charter and Agreement. This could include objectives
for performance measures such as distinctiveness. As part of this move towards a
regulatory document, the Operating Licences would not include budgets or those
other elements currently contained in the Service Licences which perform a
function of governance. These other elements would be the responsibility of the
BBC.
45. Ofcom would need to check compliance against the Operating Framework and
Licences on an annual basis. It would also need to provide, in an Annual Report, a
53

full account of how it had discharged its duties. This Report would follow the
BBC’s Annual Report. It would need to be provided in a way that is appropriate to
the high degree of public interest in the effective regulation of the BBC. As such
Ofcom might well choose to provide this as a report distinct from its other annual
reporting duties.
46. In addition to its duty to assess compliance on an annual basis, Ofcom would also
need to make an in-depth assessment of the BBC’s delivery against its regulatory
obligations, as set out in the Charter and Agreement and the Operating
Framework and Licences. Ofcom should have a duty to do this, looking across all
activities, every four years. In doing so it should use the data provided by the
BBC as well as independent research. Ofcom should be given flexibility in how it
chose to conduct such a review so as to ensure it focused on those areas of
greatest concern. As a result of these reviews Ofcom would be in a position to
recommend amending the Operating Framework or Licences through the process
for change discussed below.
47. Operating Licences require clearly documented ‘step-in’ rights for investigation
and potential intervention. As such, alongside the Operating Framework and
Licences described above, Ofcom would have broad ‘step-in’ rights, as currently
exist for the Trust.32 These ‘step-in’ rights would be necessary to ensure Ofcom
could act appropriately to address any issue where the BBC might be failing to
deliver its remit, or behaving in a way which had a negative impact on the market
not justified by the public interest. Ofcom would be able to undertake a review of
a given area at any time it deemed necessary to react to changes in the market or
emerging issues.
BBC Governance Documents
48. The following section looks at how the governance functions should be captured
in key documents. Some of these are existing functions of the BBC Executive, but
there are other responsibilities that currently reside within the BBC Trust, such as
for key elements of the Service Licences, which are not. These elements, such as
setting the budget of a given service, should be replicated in the new system, with
the BBC itself setting out the organisation’s ambition. This is needed to provide
the market and audiences with a view of the BBC’s plans and proposals. These
plans should be used to scrutinise the BBC’s proposals in advance, and
subsequently for their delivery.
32

Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation (s.
24(2)(h)) [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf

54

49. The BBC should publish both forward looking and 'after the event' reporting
documents. Forward looking, the BBC should set out in the Creative Remits and
Corporate Workplan its ambitions for the coming year, in line with the
requirements of the Operating Framework and Licences. Reporting ‘after the
event’ the BBC should publish an Annual Report and Accounts, with an analysis of
how it had performed against its stated plans.
50. The Creative Remits and Corporate Workplan would be annual forward looking
statements. It would be expected that the Creative Remits and Corporate
Workplan would be published together, as is the case with SoPPs and the
Corporate Workplan currently. Together they would provide transparency of plans
for the year ahead. The BBC should report on performance against these
statements in its Annual Report.
51. The Creative Remits would set out what the unitary Board intended the BBC to
deliver, with particular reference to how this would meet its Public Purposes within
the scope of the Operating Licences. This would provide an opportunity for
audiences and the market to see the BBC’s plans for its services for the year
ahead, replacing the current SoPPs. This would also provide an opportunity for the
BBC Board to set stretching objectives that it wanted different services to meet. It
would be expected that this should include metrics, where possible, that could be
reported against in the assessment of performance.
52. The Corporate Workplan would set out the intentions of the BBC in relation to the
operation of the Corporation. This is a document that the BBC has begun
publishing in recent years. It would be important that this continues in the new
model, particularly as a place for the BBC to set out funding of services and
corporate strategy including its budgets for the year ahead, highlighting any
changes.
53. The Annual Report and Accounts would be expected to perform a number of
functions, as set out in paragraph 70 in Chapter 1. This includes accounting for
the BBC’s delivery of its remit and performance against the Charter and
Agreement, Operating Framework and Licences, and its own plans in the Creative
Remits and Corporate Workplan. In doing this it should provide, insofar as it is
possible, metrics that allow both Ofcom to scrutinise delivery against the
Operating Framework, and the public to understand performance against the
Creative Remits. In determining these metrics the BBC should consult with Ofcom

55

to ensure the data provided an appropriate level of information. The importance of
this is discussed further in Chapter 3.

Section 3.
Reforming the Process for Changes
54. Assessing changes and new services is currently a rigid process. The lack of
flexibility in the system has been commented upon by the BBC Trust Chair, noting
that “it is either full PVT, very expensive or very small pieces of work. There is not
the flexibility to do something in the middle.”33 As set out in paragraphs 22–31 of
this Chapter, the current system is heavily prescriptive. A less rigid system with
appropriate checks and balances, including appropriate powers for the Regulator,
would help to ensure a proportionate and transparent approach in a more
streamlined way.
55. The length of time that it takes for a proposed new service or change to be either
approved or rejected is problematic because it leads to uncertainty for industry
and audiences, and can be costly, with work stretching out for years in support of
a project that has not received approval. This is in part the result of the
burdensome process, but is also the result of the BBC Executive being able to
make proposals in public without providing a timetable for coming forward with
the detailed proposal. The change to BBC3 took a long time to conclude, as set
out in paragraph 29.
56. Any new system should seek to ensure that decisions could be reached in the
minimum amount of time, whilst allowing for transparency and due consultation.
This would be to the benefit of the BBC, industry and audiences. The Charter
currently states that PVTs should be concluded within six months but allows for
longer if the BBC Trust considers it necessary. As illustrated above, this has not
always effectively limited the period of uncertainty. As such, the six month limit
should remain; but Ofcom, in line with taking a proportionate approach, should
seek to adhere to it more strictly.
57. The BBC Board would have the primary responsibility for determining if a
proposed change were ‘significant’ and warranted an application to Ofcom to
proceed with a PVT or not. The Board should undertake a test of ‘significance’ for
33

House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee (2014). Q744, Oral Evidence: Future of the BBC, HC315 Tuesday 21
October 2014 [On-line] Available at: http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/culture%20media-and-sport-committee/future-of-the-bbc/oral/14707.pdf

56

any proposed change, with public consultation as appropriate. It should notify
Ofcom of its plans, and of the results of any public and industry consultation,
permitting Ofcom to scrutinise the evidence supporting the Board’s analysis. The
responsibility to call for a PVT presently sits with the BBC Trust; and it is proposed
that it should transfer to the BBC Board. It would place the responsibility on the
Board to think with particular care about where the public interest lay in
connection with a proposed change. The regulatory ‘check and balance’ to this
proposal rests in Ofcom’s ‘step-in’ rights, allowing Ofcom (where it felt that there
were public interest issues that had not been fully considered) to carry out its own
investigations and to determine the appropriate action, as discussed in paragraph
64 below.
58. Determining the threshold for whether a change is ‘significant’ and requires a PVT
is a difficult issue. Because of the nature of the BBC and the markets in which it
operates, what might be a major change for the BBC that crossed the threshold
might have very little impact on the market or public interest. Conversely, a
seemingly small change for the BBC which might not reach the threshold, for
example in radio broadcasting, might have considerable effects. Under Clause 25
of the current Agreement there are some 'automatic triggers'. These trigger levels
might remain, and might be broadened to apply to different areas such as funding
changes or significant changes in editorial mix or audience targeting. The
threshold should be considered carefully by the BBC Board in reaching its
decision under paragraph 57; but given the changing nature of the market, trigger
levels should be seen as giving guidance and not as prescriptive.
59. It is right that the BBC should be able to make changes to its services below the
‘significance’ threshold without the need for an expensive and time-consuming
process in the manner of a PVT. This flexibility is particularly important in the
context of the pace of change in the wider market and technological
developments; piloting new digital services is increasingly useful in gathering
relevant data about audiences and impact in real-time. Where the BBC wished to
make such a change it should be transparent about its intentions, give
competitors the chance to make representations and take this into account
alongside the public interest. The Creative Remits and Corporate Workplan would
provide one way in which the BBC could notify the market of its intentions, but
changes could happen at any time. The BBC Board should publish public
protocols for how it would set out proposals transparently, and how any concerns
raised by others in the market in this regard would be considered.

57

60. Where a decision to proceed with a PVT were made, there would need to be a
formal process for assessing both the market impact and the public interest in the
change. Currently the BBC Trust undertakes the Public Value Assessment. Under
a revised system, where the BBC Board proposed a ‘significant’ change, the
Board would provide the justification for that change in terms of the public interest
and the delivery of the Public Purposes, and provide a transparent account of the
evidence it had used to reach such a decision. Much of this work would already
have been done by the BBC in determining whether a PVT were required or not,
as set out in paragraph 57. If the PVA were not satisfactorily evidenced, Ofcom
would have the right to call for further work.
61. In addition to the role of the BBC in preparing the PVA, Ofcom would be
responsible for the Market Impact Assessment. The process should be open,
providing the opportunity for consultation and discussion with the BBC, the
market and the public. At the conclusion of the PVT, in making the final decision
about the balance of the public interest in a proposed change, Ofcom and the
BBC should work closely together. Ofcom should have an obligation to engage
with the BBC and provide appropriate opportunity for the modification of
proposals in the interests of maximising public value and minimising market
impact, for which purpose a joint committee would be helpful. The ultimate
determination of the PVT process, made in the public interest and with due regard
to the interest of all parties, would rest with Ofcom.
62. There is a difficult question of how the process for changes might operate for the
closure of services, or moving on-line, as was the case for BBC Three. Under the
new model this would be subject to the same thresholds and processes as any
new service or major change. Whilst there is likely to be limited or even positive
market impact in withdrawing or reducing a service, there would still be a
legitimate role for Ofcom in scrutinising the impact on the BBC’s ability to deliver
against its Operating Licences and the public value of such a change.
63. The full PVT process as described would improve upon the current system, but
remains quite burdensome. As such, greater flexibility for the regulator could
allow for a more informed and proportionate process of assessment.
64. In line with the right of a regulator to ‘step-in’ referred to in paragraphs 47 and 57,
Ofcom should have the right to carry out a ‘mini-review’ if it felt that there was the
potential for a change to have a ‘significant’ impact on the market or public
interest that the BBC had not duly considered. This would be less rigorous than a
full PVT but could involve some limited market and public consultation at the
58

discretion of the Regulator, and should be conducted within a limited timeframe,
for example two months. Following this ‘mini-review’ Ofcom could decide that no
further action was required, could make recommendations as to what steps would
negate further action, and ultimately would have the ability to call for a full PVT. In
addition, where a new service had been initiated and threatened the existence of
other market participants before appropriate analysis had been concluded, Ofcom
should have the power to direct the BBC, in respect of a new service, to suspend
activity.
65. Taken together this proposal for a ‘mini-review’ process, and the discretion
around the ‘significance’ test suggested in paragraph 58, should add considerable
flexibility to the current PVT regime, whilst ensuring clarity for the BBC, the public
and the market.
66. For Ofcom to be able to scrutinise and enforce its decisions on both Licence
changes and performance effectively, it must have at its disposal sanctions to
address continued non-compliance. There should be a wide range of options
available, including financial sanctions, so that Ofcom could demonstrate publicly
the severity of a transgression and effect appropriate remedies.

Section 4.
Conclusion
67. The proposed Operating Framework and Licences, and the reformed PVTs, take
forward the benefits that flow from the reformed model of governance and
regulation set out in Chapter 1. They go further than this, streamlining and
simplifying the responsibilities and processes for the BBC and Ofcom.
68. Ofcom would have responsibility for the publication and maintenance of the
Operating Framework and Licences. It would hold the BBC to account against the
Framework and Licences annually, as well as through detailed performance
reviews on a four yearly cycle. It would have significant flexibility both in what it
chose to look at and the way it chose to conduct such reviews. In addition it
would have ‘step-in’ rights to be able to investigate and address issues as they
arose.
69. As set out in Chapter 1, the BBC Board has the primary responsibility for the
delivery of its activities and accounting for them. This Chapter sets out in greater
detail how the BBC would do this. The BBC would publish its plans through
59

Creative Remits and a Corporate Workplan, and report on its performance through
its Annual Report and Accounts. It would continue to determine its own strategy,
and as such would be the body that proposed changes to Operating Licences,
where it wanted to make such a change in the public interest.
70. This Chapter includes recommendations to increase the flexibility in respect of
both the threshold for a full PVT, and also a recommendation for a ‘mini-review’ to
give the regulator a more flexible tool. The primary responsibility for determining
whether a full PVT exercise were required would rest with the Board of the BBC.
This responsibility would be balanced by the right of Ofcom to ‘step-in’ to
investigate where it felt that the public interest or market impact issues had not
been fully considered. Where a full PVT were carried out, Ofcom would be the
final arbiter, determining whether a significant change were ultimately in the public
interest, taking into account the impact on the market.
71. This model meets the five criteria set out in paragraph 5. It supports the creative
output of the BBC by giving the BBC itself greater responsibility for both the
setting of its strategy and reporting on its performance. It supports the delivery of
Public Purposes by providing a clear forward looking cascade from the Purposes
set by Government, through the Operating Framework and Licences issued by
Ofcom, to the Creative Remits and Workplan published by the BBC. It sets out
the way in which citizens, consumers and industry are to be informed about what
they can expect and how they will be consulted. It also creates a framework that
ensures that the impact both on the market and in relation to public interest are
considered. In the first instance this is the responsibility of the BBC, but ultimately
it is balanced by Ofcom’s broad ‘step-in’ rights and its right to make a final
determination in respect of PVTs. It also makes clear the way in which both the
BBC and Ofcom are expected to operate with transparency and accountability, in
reporting performance and in making decisions about changes.

60

CHAPTER 3: ENGAGEMENT WITH THE PUBLIC

Introduction
1.

Effective engagement with customers and stakeholders is essential to the success
of any organisation. In the case of the BBC this engagement is even more
important. Almost everyone in the UK is a consumer of BBC content, and
because of the BBC’s public service obligations we are all effectively
stakeholders.

2.

This Chapter looks at the way that the BBC should meet this obligation to engage
with the public. Section 1 looks at how the BBC Executive and BBC Trust
currently engage with the public; Section 2 looks at how this might be revised
under new governance arrangements; Section 3 looks specifically at Audience
Councils; and Section 4 sets out the conclusions of the Chapter.

Section 1.
Current Arrangements
3.

The BBC Executive carries out a significant amount of audience research in
relation to its programming. It has detailed knowledge of its viewing levels, and a
great deal of more qualitative and quantitative research on what its audiences
think of its programmes. This is not a requirement in the Charter, but is done by
the BBC Executive to inform its operations.

4.

The BBC Trust is given by the Charter the specific duty to engage with Licence
Fee payers in a broader sense: to know the views of the audiences both in regard
to issues around individual programmes and services, and also in regard to wider
BBC issues such as value for money. To that end, the existing Charter places two
general duties on the BBC Trust: to “represent the interests of Licence Fee
payers” and to “carefully and appropriately assess the views of Licence Fee
payers”.34 The Charter also states that the Trust must establish a specific protocol

34
Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). The Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation
(s.23). [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf

61

on "engaging with Licence Fee payers". This is set out in the Trust's document:
‘Our Promise to You’.35
5.

The Charter also requires the BBC Trust to establish and support Audience
Councils for each of the Nations of the UK.36 The main function of the Councils, as
outlined in the Charter, is "to bring the diverse perspectives of Licence Fee payers
to bear on the work of the Trust, through the Councils' links with diverse
communities, including geographical based communities and other communities
of interest within the UK". These are discussed further in paragraphs 24–33.

6.

There is also a requirement in the Agreement for the Trust to consult publicly at
key moments in the delivery of its functions. These moments include: developing
purpose remits, issuing Service Licences, reviewing Service Licences and at
specific points in the Public Value Test process.

7.

In addition to those areas specified under the Charter, the Trust also uses a variety
of other methods to meet its overarching obligation to assess the views of and
represent Licence Fee payers:
i.

it carries out quantitative research to understand the strength of certain
views amongst the whole population. The annual Purpose Remit Survey
(PRS) is a key tool to measure people's views on the delivery of the Public
Purposes. The survey was started in 2007 and provides important trend
data. The results from the PRS have contributed to strategies in areas
where there are gaps in performance, such as portrayal and
distinctiveness;

ii.

the Trust has recently set up a 10,000 strong panel that enables it to
monitor regularly strategic audience issues. The first piece of work
undertaken via the panel was a survey in late 2014 on Licence Fee payers'
views on future priorities for the BBC. It has more recently been used for
the PVT in respect of the BBC Three proposals and for the Speech Radio
service review;

iii.

another recent addition to these methods is branded ‘trails’, which the
Trust uses to stimulate responses to a consultation. These use the wide

35

BBC Trust (2007). Our Promise to You: How the Trust will engage with audiences [On-line]. Available at:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/regulatory_framework/protocols/e1_audience_engagement.pdf
36
Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). The Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation
(s.39). [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf

62

reach of the BBC to engage audiences in the Trust’s research by
advertising consultations in between programmes; and
iv.

8.

the Trust also commissions a significant amount of audience research to
understand views in more detail. This research uses a mix of qualitative
methods such as focus groups, workshops, interviews and deliberative
sessions.

In this context it is important to understand that the term ‘Licence Fee payer’ is
understood in a rather broad sense. The current Charter defines a Licence Fee
payer in Section 57:
“In this Charter, a reference to a “licence fee payer” is not to be taken
literally but includes, not only a person to whom a TV licence is issued
under section 364 of the Communications Act 2003, but also (so far as is
sensible in the context) any other person in the UK who watches, listens to
or uses any BBC service, or may do so or wish to do so in the future.”37

9.

This arrangement defines the term ‘Licence Fee payer’ in broad terms, bringing it
close to the public interest. It would be helpful if the new Charter could be clearer
about the BBC’s responsibilities in respect of the public interest and the Licence
Fee payer.

10. The Trust also has transparency obligations under the Charter to “ensure that the
BBC observes high standards of openness and transparency”.38 In delivering this
the Trust is required to publish protocols setting out how it will discharge the duty.

Section 2.
Revised Arrangements
11. This Review argues that the responsibility to the Licence Fee payer should rest
primarily with the Board of the BBC. It must be expected, therefore, that the new
Charter would replicate most of the obligations towards audiences and Licence
Fee payers and place those obligations on to the unitary Board.

37

Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). The Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation
(s.57) [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf
38
Department for Culture, Media and Sport (2006). The Royal Charter for the Continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation
(s.23 (f)) [On-line]. Available at: http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/about/how_we_govern/charter.pdf

63

12. The BBC will need to do more to engage Licence Fee payers, and be accountable
to them, in the next Charter period. It needs to engage the public as citizens as
well as consumers of BBC content.
13. Specifically, there should be a requirement for the BBC to involve audiences in
setting strategy in much the same way as the responsibility currently sits with the
BBC Trust:
i.

when proposing significant changes in the BBC’s overall strategy or
direction, including the launch of a new BBC service or a significant
change to an existing one; and

ii.

in the co-design of new service ideas such as those proposed in the BBC
document ‘British, Bold, Creative’, including the ‘Ideas Service’ and
‘iPlay’.39

14. There should also be a requirement for the BBC to involve audiences in
performance assessment as follows:
i.

as part of its regular, in-depth reviews of the performance and value for
money of all BBC services; and

ii.

in assessing how to resolve remit, audience or creative challenges, such
as diversity, portrayal, younger audiences, and news services for the
Devolved Nations.

15. There are good reasons to think that bringing together the obligation to engage
the Licence Fee payer with the responsibility for setting the strategy and delivering
new services would bring significant benefits. This could make use of the BBC’s
reach and expertise in digital services to connect with more people and
understand their views. By the end of 2016, the existing Charter period, the BBC
estimates that 10 million people will have signed on to the BBC's digital platform.
Within a further period of ten years it is likely that a very high percentage of the
BBC’s audience, and therefore of the country, will be connected digitally with the
BBC.
16. The BBC should seek to identify ways to harness this relationship to inform its
output, activities, and the shape of its organisation. The Charter should be framed
39
iPlay is an on-line children’s portal. The Ideas Service is a platform for cultural and science content from both the BBC and
selected third parties. Cited in: ‘BRITISH, BOLD, CREATIVE: The BBC’s Programmes and services in the next Charter’ (page 6) [Online]. Available at: https://downloads.bbc.co.uk/aboutthebbc/reports/pdf/futureofthebbc2015.pdf

64

in such a way that allows the BBC to use these new digital tools alongside others
in the most effective way, delivering value for money.
17. There should be a requirement for the BBC Board to include in its Annual Report
and Accounts a section setting out how the Charter out-reach obligations had
been met. This Report, already referred to in Chapter 1, would set out the work
done during the year, and how the views of Licence Fee payers had shaped the
BBC's decisions.
18. The BBC Board should also inherit the obligation to ensure the BBC is open and
transparent. The Annual Report and Accounts is an important part of this, but
being open with the Licence Fee payer is an on-going obligation, not something
that can be discharged in a single document. This was reflected in a recent
speech by the BBC’s Director General, who called for an ‘Open BBC for the
internet age’.40
19. In relation to public engagement, research and consultation, this requirement for
transparency is particularly important. There should be an assumption in favour of
transparency of findings, and where possible results should be provided in a way
that allows the public to access, interrogate and understand them properly. This
might include, for example, providing comparable data in a time-series so that
change over time could be easily understood.
20. One of the main challenges in engaging with the Licence Fee payer, understood in
the broadest sense, is how to understand the views of the hardest to reach. This
includes those who may not find it easy to contribute their views because of
accessibility, age or other factors. It also includes the small numbers who do not
use BBC services of any kind. Whilst these groups may represent only a fraction
of the total population, their views would also need to be understood by the BBC.
21. Reaching out to engage with the public in a way that understands their interests
as citizens as well as consumers would be a significant change in focus for the
way the BBC undertakes its consultation and research. As such the Board might
wish to bring in appropriate external advice and challenge to ensure this important
work were being done as effectively and transparently as possible.
22. Consultation and research would also be important for the BBC’s Regulator.
Ofcom already undertakes a wide range of research, consultation and
	  Hall, T. (2015), speech made at the Science Museum on the future vision of the BBC Transcript [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/speeches/2015/tony-hall-distinctive-bbc	  

40

65

engagement in respect of its wider obligations and publishes a range of wellrespected industry data. Given the proposed additional responsibilities in relation
to the BBC, further research in this area might be required.
23. In relation to assessment and approval of BBC services, Ofcom would need to
consult to ensure it had an appropriate evidence base to make its judgements. It
might choose to use research and evidence provided by the BBC, but should also
be free to commission its own.

Section 3.
Audience Councils
24. The Audience Councils serve an advisory role, and do not have any formal
decision-making functions. They have three key roles, which are set out in the
Trust protocols, based on the Charter:
i.

to provide an annual assessment of the BBC’s performance in their
Nation; providing their assessment to the BBC Trust, at least once per
year, on how well the BBC serves audiences in their Nation, from the
perspective of Licence Fee payers. This informs the Trust’s assessment
of the BBC’s performance and each Council’s own annual review;

ii.

to identify emerging issues of importance to audiences; advising the Trust
on issues that concern BBC audiences across the UK and in their Nation,
with a particular focus on matters the Trust can address. This advice
informs the development of the Trust’s annual Workplan; and

iii.

to provide input into the Trust’s decision-making; providing some advice
to the Trust, from the perspective of Licence Fee payers, on significant
matters the Trust is considering. This primarily informs the Trust’s fiveyearly reviews of each BBC service as well as proposed major changes to
the BBC’s services.

25. Each Audience Council is chaired by the Trust member for that Nation and has
around 11 ‘lay’ members who have an informed interest in the work of the BBC
and an understanding of the needs, interests, concerns and diversity of the
audience in their area.

66

26. In England a network of 12 audience panels supports the Audience Council.
There is one panel for each of the BBC’s broadcasting regions, which is led by the
Audience Council member for that region.
27. With the exception of the Trust member, the BBC Trust appoints Audience Council
members on the recommendation of local selection panels. This follows an open
recruitment process. The ‘lay’ members are unpaid, though they receive out-ofpocket expenses.
28. Each Audience Council meets around seven to nine times a year, usually at a BBC
office in the relevant Nation. Minutes from these meetings are published on the
BBC Trust’s website. In addition to the formal meetings, the Councils also
undertake a programme of audience engagement activities, in order to help them
in their assessment of the BBC’s performance, and to identify issues of
importance.
29. Representatives from each Audience Council meet annually with the full Trust to
report on how well they consider that the BBC is serving audiences in each
Nation, to advise on any issues raised, and to suggest priorities for the coming
year.
30. There have been a number of issues raised about the way the Audience Councils
are arranged. This is both in respect of how they operate practically, as well as the
efficacy of the ‘council’ model in public engagement:
i.

in feeding into the BBC Trust, rather than the BBC Executive, the
distance between Licence Fee payer and service provider is long. The
formal line of accountability through the BBC Trust can leave members
feeling that their views are not reaching the decision-makers as
effectively as they might;

ii.

there is a lack of clarity about the feedback loop and accountability of the
BBC to the Audience Councils. In performing their duties as specified
under the Charter, the Councils provide significant input into the BBC
Trust, and by extension the BBC. However, there is no clear mechanism
by which the BBC Executive or Trust explains the way in which this input
is considered and used; and

iii.

Audience Councils do not have an effective method of contributing their
views on the assessment of performance and in the formation of
67

strategy, particularly in respect of the services and issues specific to their
Nation.
31. Many of these issues would be addressed by the benefits to the Audience
Councils of a unitary Board. Even without further reform, having Councils
connected direct to the unitary Board, with the Chair of the Council sitting on the
BBC Board, would reduce the distance between the Council and the responsible
decision-making body, thereby increasing accountability. It would also make the
feedback loop much easier for the Chair to manage.
32. Even with the benefits referred to in the paragraph above, there would remain
some concern about the extent to which an Audience Council is, or could ever be,
fully representative. The fact that members are unpaid and that attendance on the
Council does not qualify for time off work for public duties (and may not qualify for
voluntary leave) can make it difficult to attract membership, particularly from those
on lower pay. The small number of members on each of the current Audience
Councils is a challenge for the effective representation of the diversity of the UK.
In addition, by its nature members of each Council ‘self-select’ by volunteering.
The ability of any individual member to engage widely outside committee meetings
will be variable. As such any council model could represent only a partial picture.
33. The BBC should seek to address these concerns, in particular by seeking to
increase the diversity of the Councils, and by looking for ways to link their
feedback to the information gained from digital platforms discussed above in
paragraphs 15 and 16. The current Charter is highly prescriptive with regard to
the operation of Audience Councils. To allow the BBC to adapt and improve,
there should be greater flexibility in the new Charter, permitting the BBC Board to
determine the most effective way of meeting its public engagement obligations.
Devolved Nations
34. Audience Councils would also benefit from the introduction of National Operating
Licences, which would be possible under the proposals in Chapter 2. These
would provide a document against which the Councils could assess performance
more clearly. There is a question about whether such a Licence would be
appropriate for England in the same way as it might for any of the Devolved
Nations. This would need to be addressed by the BBC in a way that ensured it
remained accountable to each of the constituent Nations of the UK.

68

35. For the Devolved Nations, the proposals in this Chapter, together with other
proposals in this Review, would amount to an important change in the relationship
the BBC might have during the next Charter period with its audiences in Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland. Chapter 1 recommended that Non-Executive
Directors for the Devolved Nations should be on the unitary Board of the BBC,
bringing these Directors into the central decision-making body of the BBC;
Chapter 2 set out how Operating Licences could be created in respect of the
Devolved Nations, describing more clearly than before the BBC's obligations to
those Nations. This Chapter makes recommendations that would build
engagement with audiences, connecting the BBC more effectively with the public
across the UK. If the BBC were also to organise itself so as to give more
responsibility to National/regional boards, subject to oversight by the main Board,
this would further support the BBC's commitment to the Devolved Nations.
36. Taken together these reforms should significantly strengthen the relationship the
BBC has with the Nations of the UK, putting the BBC in a strong position to fulfil
its Charter responsibilities as the public sector broadcaster for the entire Nation.

Section 4.
Conclusion
37. I propose that the new Charter should place on the BBC Board clear obligations to
engage with the public, similar to those currently placed on the BBC Trust. The
BBC Board will need to engage the public as citizens as well as consumers of
BBC content. The Board must involve the public in major changes in strategy and
services provided.
38. The BBC needs to ensure that it makes full use of the new digital tools it is
developing to capture the views of Licence Fee payers. New technologies and
techniques should mean that during the next Charter period the BBC will be able
to engage more effectively with a significant percentage of the public. Given the
speed of change in technology, it is proposed that the new Charter be less
prescriptive about how the BBC meets its broad engagement obligations, and
about the precise constitution of Audience Councils.
39. The Non-Executive Directors for the Devolved Nations would chair the Audience
Councils, and their membership of the BBC unitary Board would bring the
Councils' advisory role and the Board's decision-making role closer together. The
existence of National Operating Licences would give greater substance to the
69

work of the Councils. Further thought needs to be given to achieving greater
diversity within their membership.
40. There would be a requirement on the BBC to set out in detail in its Annual Report
and Accounts the work it had done to meet its Charter obligations, and the
lessons it had learnt in doing so.

70

CHAPTER 4: EDITORIAL STANDARDS AND COMPLAINTS SYSTEMS

Introduction
1.

The BBC has a dual complaints system involving both the BBC Trust and Ofcom.
The Trust and Ofcom have sought to deal with potential overlaps through a
detailed Memorandum of Understanding, but the arrangements can still make the
complaints process complicated for the public and lead to inefficiencies.

2.

The respective roles in the current system of the BBC Executive, the BBC Trust
and Ofcom are set out in the paragraphs below. The greatest number of
complaints relate to editorial issues. The BBC Trust has an important role in
approving editorial standards, set out in the BBC Editorial Guidelines, and hears
complaints against these guidelines. Ofcom also has powers to hear complaints
against the BBC in certain areas so, in practice, there is a significant overlap.
These complaints are heard against the Ofcom Broadcasting Code.

3.

The complexity of the current system was recognised by the BBC Executive who,
in its response to the Consultation Paper, argued that it was difficult to see how
the current system is "helpful to the complainant or a proportionate use of
resources".41

4.

This Chapter is set out in the following order:
•

Section 1 describes the current system with particular regard to editorial
complaints;

•

Section 2 sets out proposals for reforming the system; and

•

Section 3 sets out conclusions.

41

BBC Executive, (2015). ‘We can simplify and streamline the way we handle editorial complaints without reducing accountability
to audiences’, in BRITISH, BOLD, CREATIVE: The BBC’s submission to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport’s Charter
Review public consultation’ (s.3 17.2) [On-line]. Available at:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/aboutthebbc/insidethebbc/reports/pdf/bbc_charter_review_dcmsreview_october2015.pdf

71

Section 1.
The Current System
Types of Complaint
5.

Complaints to the BBC can cover all BBC output (e.g. television and radio,
website, tweets and BBC iPlayer). The BBC Executive has established and
maintains an internal system within the BBC for handling complaints. This is laid
out in the BBC Complaints Framework set by the BBC Trust.42

6.

Within this Framework there are six distinct areas about which members of the
public can complain. These reflect the range of activities for which the BBC is
responsible and the issues that are raised.43 These are:
●
●
●
●
●
●

7.

Editorial complaints;
Fair Trading complaints;
Television Licensing complaints;
General complaints44;
complaints about the allocation to party political broadcasters, party
election broadcasters and referendum campaign broadcasts; and
complaints about complaints handling, and the BBC Trust itself.

The current regulatory oversight of the BBC’s output is carried out by the BBC
Trust and Ofcom, as summarised in Appendix 4. The roles of these two bodies are
discussed in detail in the paragraphs that follow.

Current System: the BBC Executive and the BBC Trust
8.

The current system of complaints was last updated by the BBC Trust following
public consultation and audience research in 2012. The process for dealing with
complaints within the six sections detailed in paragraph 6 are set out clearly on the
BBC Trust’s complaints web page. Each section ranges from a two-stage
complaints procedure up to four stages.

9.

Editorial complaints to the BBC Executive can cover all types of content whether
broadcast, on demand, or written on-line. The great majority of complaints come

42

BBC Trust (2012), ‘Complaints Framework’ [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/governance/complaints_framework
43
Digital switchover help scheme complaints and appeals procedures are now redundant.
44
‘General Complaints’ cover all complaints that do not fall into one of the other categories, e.g. coverage and interference.

72

direct to the BBC Executive; appeals against decisions made by the Executive are
handled by the BBC Trust. Complainants can make an editorial complaint if the
BBC has failed to follow the Editorial Guidelines. The BBC complaints procedure45,
in relation to editorial issues, is set out below:
i.

Stage 1a: the complainant complains to the BBC Executive. It aims to
provide an initial response within 10 days;

ii.

Stage 1b: if the complainant is dissatisfied with the reply from the BBC
Executive at Stage 1a, they can write again to the BBC Executive. It aims
to provide a response within 20 days;

iii.

Stage 2: if the complainant is still not happy, they can write to the
Editorial Complaints Unit (ECU) in relation to editorial complaints or, for
general content complaints, the BBC Division responsible for the area
they are complaining about. The BBC Division will deal with anything that
does not fall into the remit of the ECU. The complainant should expect a
response within 20 days for straightforward complaints or 30 days for
more complex cases; and

iv.

Stage 3: if the complainant is still not happy, they can appeal to the BBC
Trust. Complaints escalated to the BBC Trust’s Editorial Standards
Committee at Stage 3 numbered 326 in 2014–15, as shown in Box B.46

10. The complaints procedure is currently driven by the complainant wishing to take
the complaint further. However, the BBC Trust is able to look into a case further if
there has been a potentially serious editorial breach, or if it believes the Editorial
Guidelines may have been applied incorrectly. The BBC Trust has also, in very rare
cases, considered pre-broadcast matters in its obligation to uphold the standards
set out in the Editorial Guidelines.
11. The Trust, upon finding that the Editorial Guidelines had been breached, may ask
the BBC Executive to take appropriate action, such as an on-air or published
correction or apology. They are unable to impose fines or penalties.
12. Editorial complaints account for the majority of all complaints received by the
BBC. Box B shows the numbers of complaints received by the BBC at each stage
of the complaints process, as stated in the BBC’s Annual Report for 2014–15.
45
BBC Trust, ‘Editorial and general complaints - the process’, in Making a complaint [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/contact_us/making_a_complaint.html
46
If a complaint is closed by the BBC Executive at Stage 1b, the complainant may appeal direct to the BBC Trust under Stage 3.

73

Box B: Number of Complaints Received by the BBC
Stage
Initial complaints received by the BBC at Stage 147

Number of Complaints
Received
259,886

Editorial Complaints escalated to the Editorial
Complaints Unit at Stage 2

583

Editorial Complaints escalated to the BBC Trust’s
Editorial Standards Committee on appeal at Stage 3

326

Current System: Ofcom
13. Ofcom's remit in relation to editorial issues is set out in the Communications Act
2003. The remit includes:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

editorial accuracy and impartiality;
protection of under 18s;
harm and offence issues;
avoidance of inciting crime or disorder;
responsible approach to religious content;
prohibition of use of images of a very brief duration; and
fairness and privacy.

14. Ofcom regulates editorial standards for the whole of the broadcasting sector. It is
able to handle complaints, but there are two main areas from which it is currently
excluded:
i.

Ofcom cannot hear complaints or appeals against the BBC in respect of
‘accuracy and impartiality’. Under the Charter and Agreement these areas
are reserved exclusively for the BBC Trust; and

ii.

Ofcom, in respect of other broadcasters, cannot look at ‘accuracy’ beyond
news programming, and ‘impartiality’ beyond news and current affairs.

This issue of Ofcom's restricted scope is discussed further under paragraph 43
since it would be expected that Ofcom should be able, as the BBC Trust is
currently, to look at all of the BBC’s output.
47
The combined number of Editorial, General and Fair Trading complaints. The complaints received at this stage are not broken
down into respective areas.

74

15. Ofcom regulates the BBC against the Ofcom Broadcasting Code. This
Broadcasting Code derives from the Broadcasting Act 1996 and the
Communications Act 2003, which set the criteria for television and radio, covering
standards in programmes, sponsorship, product placement in television
programmes and fairness and privacy.
16. Whilst in most cases Ofcom will wait for the broadcaster to respond to a
complaint first, there is not an official ‘Broadcaster First’ rule, meaning that both
the Broadcaster and Ofcom could be dealing with the same complaint
simultaneously. The Memorandum of Understanding between the BBC and Ofcom
was drawn up to try to resolve this problem.
17. The Ofcom process for complaints handling follows three steps:
i.

Stage 1: initial assessment and investigation. Ofcom considers whether
there may have been a breach of the Broadcasting Code that requires a
response from the broadcaster;

ii.

Stage 2: preparation of preliminary view. Ofcom prepares a preliminary
view on the investigation based on the substance of the complaint and a
representation from the broadcaster. This preliminary view is then given
to the broadcaster and further representations are then sought; and

iii.

Stage 3: decision. After Ofcom has received further representations from
the broadcaster, Ofcom will finalise its decision.

The most serious issues go to full investigation by the Ofcom Content Board who
have the delegated responsibility of the main Ofcom Board to deal with these
issues. An explanation of the role of the Ofcom Content Board can be found in
Chapter 1, paragraph 57.
18. All decisions, including the decision not to proceed with a complaint beyond initial
assessment, are published in a regular ‘Broadcast Bulletin’ on the Ofcom
website.48
19. Where Ofcom finds that the BBC has breached its Broadcasting Code, it is able to
issue a direction, like the BBC Trust, to broadcast a correction or a statement of
Ofcom’s findings. In addition the 2003 Communications Act gives Ofcom the
48
Ofcom, ‘Broadcast and On Demand Bulletins’, in Stakeholders [On-line]. Available at:
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/enforcement/broadcast-bulletins

75

power to fine the BBC for any breaches of editorial standards: “The maximum
penalty that may be imposed on the BBC on any occasion by Ofcom in exercise of
a power conferred by virtue of the BBC Charter and Agreement is £250,000.”49
20. Complaints about the BBC account for approximately 9% of all Content
Standards complaints received by Ofcom. Box C sets out the number of
complaints received by Ofcom for the year 2014–15 and the corresponding ones
that relate to the BBC.
Box C: Number of Editorial Complaints Received by Ofcom
Total number of
complaints received

Number that relate to
the BBC

Complaints received by Ofcom

28,551

2,487

Full investigations completed by
Ofcom

217

19

The interaction of the BBC Trust and Ofcom
21. The dual system means that the interaction between the BBC Trust and Ofcom
can be complicated. If a complaint is submitted to Ofcom regarding an issue of
‘accuracy and impartiality’, then Ofcom will pass it directly on to the BBC as being
beyond its scope. Complainants are unable to take up such issues with Ofcom,
even if they are dissatisfied with their response from the BBC.
22. Within areas of editorial complaint (other than ‘accuracy and impartiality’), if a
response from the BBC Trust does not satisfy the complainant, Ofcom is able to
investigate. This investigation is not classed as an appeal by Ofcom, but is
regarded as a completely new complaint. The complaints process must start
again from the beginning, this time following Ofcom’s complaints procedure.
23. The BBC Trust can investigate any complaint, even if it is within Ofcom’s remit,
outlined in paragraph 13. This can lead to simultaneous investigations. For
example, two episodes of a Jonathan Ross and Russell Brand Radio 2 broadcast,
which resulted in a significant number of complaints to both the BBC and Ofcom,
were investigated by both parties. Both the BBC Trust and Ofcom investigated the
alleged breach of their respective standards. The BBC Trust Editorial Standards
Committee concluded that the material was “so grossly offensive that there was
49
Communications Act (2003). Part 3 Television and Radio Services (s.198 (5)) [On-line]. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/section/198

76

no justification for its broadcast”50 and directed the BBC to broadcast apologies
on Radio 2. The Ofcom Content Board reached a similar conclusion and Ofcom
fined the BBC a total of £150,000 (£80,000 for infringement of privacy and £70,000
for harm and offence).51
24. The current process for identifying whether a complaint has been submitted
simultaneously to both regulators is unclear. Ofcom’s own guidance suggests that
it is up to the complainant to inform Ofcom as to whether they have
simultaneously submitted two complaints.

Section 2.
Reforming the Dual Regulatory System
25. Any reviewer would be bound to conclude that the existing system is complicated
and confusing. What is clear is that the remits of the BBC Trust and Ofcom
overlap. Ofcom can hear any complaint in respect of the BBC, subject to the
exclusions set out in paragraph 14 above. The BBC Trust can investigate any
complaint, even if it is within Ofcom’s remit.
26. Any revised Standards and Complaints handling system needs to meet the
following criteria:
i.

a simpler, clearer and proportionate complaints system for the BBC, which
offers value for money and removes the current dual regulatory system;

ii.

an appeals system that is independent of the BBC;

iii.

a complaints system that is able to prioritise and resolve the most serious
matters, with appropriate ‘step-in’ rights for the regulator;

iv.

a complaints system that maintains the confidence of complainants, is
easily accessible by them, and deals with them fairly in a way that holds
the BBC publicly accountable; and

v.

a complaints system that continues to inform programme makers.

50

BBC Trust (2008). Editorial Standards Findings: Appeals and editorial issues considered by the Trust’s Editorial Standards
Committee (s. 2.1) [On-line]. Available at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/nol/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/21_11_08_brand_ross_moyles.pdf
51
Ofcom (2009). ‘BBC Brand/Ross Fine’, in Ofcom for Consumers [On-line]. Available at:
http://consumers.ofcom.org.uk/news/bbc-brandross-fine/

77

27. Almost all who commented during the Consultation process argued that the dual
complaints system needed to be simplified: that there should be only one point for
appeal above the Broadcaster itself; and this final Appeal stage needed to be
entirely independent of the BBC.
28. If the final Appeal stage needs to be independent of the BBC, it could be achieved
by either: (i) all BBC related appeals (both those currently dealt with by the Trust
and by Ofcom) moving to OfBeeb, a bespoke regulator for the BBC; or (ii) all
Appeals being consolidated within Ofcom.
29. This Review argued in Chapter 1 that the balance of advantage lay in favour of
consolidating regulatory functions within Ofcom: that Ofcom should become
responsible for all regulatory matters including complaints, and be granted
oversight powers of a BBC unitary Board. This change, together with other
proposals set out below, would lead to a simplified and independent complaints
system.
30. If regulatory oversight moved to Ofcom, it is the BBC unitary Board which would
have the primary responsibility for maintaining the high editorial standards that
audiences expect of BBC content. This would be a central responsibility of the
Board, to be delivered in an open and transparent way, as set out in paragraph 70
in Chapter 1.
‘Broadcaster First’ Rule
31. A ‘Broadcaster First’ rule has many advantages. It ensures that the Broadcaster
stays close to its audiences and to what is concerning them; it recognises the
accountability of the Broadcaster, if an error has been made, to put matters right;
and it should provide value for money as issues may be dealt with quickly, keeping
regulatory involvement to a minimum.
32. In practice this is how the majority of the BBC’s editorial complaints are currently
handled. This Review recommends a formal ‘Broadcaster First’ system for the
BBC. Complainants would be made aware that they were required to take their
complaint first to the BBC itself, with the right of Appeal to an independent body if
they were dissatisfied with the outcome.52

52
Complaints about unfair treatment or unwarranted infringements of privacy in relation to BBC programming would not be able to
follow this model as Ofcom has a duty under section 110 of the Broadcasting Act 1996 to consider and adjudicate upon such
complaints.

78

33. If the complaints process were to follow a ‘Broadcaster First’ model, as proposed,
Ofcom should have appropriate ‘step-in’ rights. This would enable Ofcom to
intervene at an earlier stage in the process if it considered that exceptional
circumstances warranted such an early intervention, and should ensure that any
harm could be dealt with expeditiously. In other areas, for example complaints
regarding impartiality in General Elections and high-profile cases with significant
reputational issues, a protocol should be developed for reducing the length of time
before Ofcom could begin an investigation.
34. Additionally, Ofcom should have appropriate rights to initiate an investigation,
absent any complaint, if it appeared to it that there were evidence of a potentially
significant failure to comply with the standards set out in the Ofcom Broadcasting
Code.
35. This model would be consistent with how Ofcom currently operates. Ofcom
already has powers to ‘step-in’, enabling it to intervene early or to initiate an
investigation into a breach of standards without first receiving a complaint. This
Review recommends that Ofcom should continue to be able to ‘step-in’ in relation
to the BBC, if it considered that there were exceptional circumstances.
36. Where the issue at hand did not warrant ‘step-in’ action, which will be in the great
majority of cases, there should be a requirement placed on the BBC to deal with
the complaint in hand with reasonable haste. The BBC Board would need to
agree with Ofcom a time obligation in respect of a complaint which, if breached,
would allow the complainant to dispense with the ‘Broadcaster First’ rule, and
have direct access to the regulatory Appeal process.
37. If a ‘Broadcaster First’ process were applied to the complaints procedure for the
BBC, as above, the BBC would remain responsible for all initial complaints and
Ofcom would only receive complaints on appeal. In this case, based on the
number of appeals received by the BBC Trust in 2014–15, Ofcom would have
dealt with an additional 326 cases. This compares with the 217 cases that were
taken to full investigation in the same year by the Ofcom Content Board.
Simplifying the BBC’s complaints system
38. The unitary Board of the BBC would be responsible for setting out the procedures
for dealing with complaints. These complaints would be judged against the BBC’s
Editorial Guidelines. The procedure would need to be set out clearly on the BBC

79

website. The process would be subject to review by the Regulator. To simplify the
current system it is proposed it should follow three stages:
i.

Stage 1: initial contact with the BBC call centre or programme makers by
the complainant. It would be hoped that the great majority of complaints
could be dealt with at this stage, either through appropriate explanation or
apology;

ii.

Stage 2: if the complainant remained dissatisfied, there would be an
internal review, independent of the programme teams/ editorial divisions.
It is proposed that the internal review process would be overseen by
someone with significant editorial experience, appointed by and
accountable to the Editor-in-Chief, and likely to involve a small team of
staff that sit centrally (outside the editorial divisions).
On the basis of existing volumes of BBC complaints, the team would be
likely to consider around 1,500 requests for review each year. The vast
majority of these requests for a review are likely to be easily responded to,
referred back down the chain, or rejected.
For those requests where the internal review team believed that there were
sufficient reasons to review the original response, the team would either
resolve the issue themselves, or undertake an investigation into the
matter.
The outcome of this review would represent the BBC’s final editorial
position and, therefore, would be the final stage of consideration by the
BBC against the BBC’s own Editorial Guidelines; and

iii.

Stage 3: an appeal to Ofcom, as the independent regulator.

The Code against which Appeals are held
39. The BBC has its own set of standards, set out in the BBC Editorial Guidelines.
This is currently the responsibility of the BBC Trust and incorporates the
requirements of the Ofcom Broadcasting Code. If the proposed new
arrangements were put in place, responsibility for the Guidelines would rest with
the Board of the BBC. BBC management would be responsible for its drafting and
for its implementation, but the Board would have oversight and accountability for
this function. Given the importance of maintaining high standards in all its work,
80

and most particularly in relation to ‘accuracy and impartiality’ in its editorial
functions, this oversight function cannot be delegated. As part of this oversight
the Board would need to look regularly at how the complaints system worked, and
receive details of any failures against its own Guidelines. As recommended in
Chapter 1, paragraph 70, the Board would report annually on how it had carried
out this function and about any changes in respect of the Guidelines.
40. Any appeal against the BBC to Ofcom would be against Ofcom's own
Broadcasting Code, which applies to all broadcasters. Some have questioned
whether this would lead to a diminution of standards within the BBC. It does not
follow that this would happen. The characteristic of the BBC Guidelines which
most distinguishes them from Ofcom's Broadcasting Code, other than that they
cover all of the BBC's output, is that they are more prescriptive: they not only set
out what the standards are, but how they should be complied with. The BBC's
own Guidelines in the key areas of ‘accuracy and impartiality’ are not significantly
different from the Ofcom Broadcasting Code. Both sets of guidelines53 54 make
reference to 'due' accuracy and 'due' impartiality and define the term 'due' as
meaning "adequate or appropriate to the subject and nature of the programme."
Ofcom and its Content Board have a high reputation in editorial matters. Whilst
there is evidence that when the BBC Trust and Ofcom have considered
complaints about the same item of content the findings have on occasion been
different, I see no reason why Ofcom, as a respected regulator, would not meet
Licence Fee payers’ expectations with regard to standards they expect from the
BBC.
41. It is of note that the CMS Select Committee Report of February 2015 also
proposed that editorial appeals should go to Ofcom. The Committee commented:
“We recommend that Ofcom become the final arbiter of complaints over
BBC content including matters concerning impartiality and accuracy, but
that complaints should be considered by the BBC in the first instance.
Ofcom should be given additional resources for taking on this role which
are commensurate with the responsibility and estimated workload. We
believe this transfer of responsibility will, if anything, strengthen the

53
BBC, ‘Section 4: Impartiality’, in the BBC Editorial Guidelines, [On-line]. Available at:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/editorialguidelines/pdfs/Editorial_Guidelines_in_full.pdf
54
Ofcom (2015). ‘Section 5: Due Impartiality and Due Accuracy and Undue Prominence of Views and Opinions’, in The Ofcom
Broadcasting Code [On-line]. Available at: http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/broadcast/code-july15/Ofcom_Broadcast_Code_July_2015.pdf

81

independence of the BBC, and also make the complaints process simpler,
and appear more transparent and fair.” 55
42. Whatever regulatory appeals framework is put in place in respect of the BBC's
editorial standards, it should be recognised that the issue of standards is first and
foremost one for the unitary Board. The BBC has a huge interest in maintaining
the high standards to which it currently works; its reputation in the UK and
overseas depends upon it. It seems likely that the Board would from time to time
wish to commission, as the Trust has hitherto, external reviews of particular
editorial issues, for example impartiality in relation to economic reporting.56 The
Directors collectively form the first line of defence in guarding the BBC’s
reputation for high editorial standards and independent broadcasting. The
Regulator is the second line of defence and could itself commission independent
studies.
Ofcom’s Scope of Content Oversight
43. As noted in paragraph 14, the scope of Ofcom’s oversight is limited when
compared with the BBC Trust’s regulation of all BBC output. It is proposed that
Ofcom’s scope should be widened to enable it to have oversight of editorial
complaints, including for ‘accuracy and impartiality’, in respect of all the BBC’s
linear broadcasting and video on demand output. There would remain three areas
of complaints that would still need to be dealt with:
i.
ii.
iii.

complaints in respect of the BBC’s written on-line material;
complaints in respect of the TV Licence Fee; and
general complaints about the BBC.

44. In respect of 43(i), in the United Kingdom currently no written on-line material falls
within the auspices of a Government appointed regulator. It does fall within the
remit of the BBC Trust, but legally it does so as a self-regulatory activity, since the
BBC Trust is part of the BBC itself. The transfer of regulation to an independent
body outside the BBC gives rise to a policy choice for Government: that either
written on-line activity should remain a self-regulatory activity, with responsibility
resting with the BBC Board; or that the oversight work should move to the
independent Regulator. If the latter option is chosen, it should be possible to draft
55
House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee (2015). ‘Regulation of BBC Content’ (s.337) in Future of the BBC:
Fourth Report of Session 2014–15 [On-line]]. Available at:
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmcumeds/315/315.pdf
56
A list of external reviews commissioned by the BBC Trust in relation to impartiality in Editorial Standards is available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/our_work/editorial_standards/impartiality.html

82

the amendment to the Broadcasting Code to make clear that Ofcom's additional
duties do not stretch beyond the BBC's output.
45. The area of TV Licence complaints, under 43(ii), has the second largest volume of
complaints. Although the number of complaints taken through to appeal in this
area is small, it would not fit naturally into any regulatory body. The BBC Executive
has proposed that the Charter requires the Board to establish, and fund, an
independent Ombudsman to hear appeals on TV licensing matters.57 The
Ombudsman would have the power to determine findings in this area, with no
referral to the BBC required, and should have the power to require the Board to
take the necessary remedial action. However appointed, the Ombudsman should
meet the requirements of the Ombudsman Association.58
46. General complaints about the BBC, under 43(iii), are concerned with the operation
of the BBC. It is for the BBC itself to account for its operational decisions and as
such no appeal would be expected, except in those areas where Ofcom has a
regulatory role.
47. The current and proposed regulatory oversight of the BBC’s output is summarised
in Appendix 4.
Sanctions
48. The BBC Trust, in cases where it has found against the BBC Executive for a
breach of the Editorial Guidelines, does not have the power to levy fines. Indeed,
it would be perverse if it had such a power since the BBC Trust and the BBC
Executive are within one legal organisation. By contrast Ofcom does have the
power to levy fines against the BBC, and has done so on a number of occasions.
It is proposed that this right to impose fines be maintained.

Section 3.
Conclusions
49. In respect of editorial standards and complaints systems:
i.

I conclude that the current complaints system, with responsibilities divided
between the BBC Executive, the BBC Trust and Ofcom, is confusing;

57

A letter from the BBC proposing the establishment of an independent Ombudsman is available on-line at:
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/aboutthebbc/insidethebbc/howwework/policiesandguidelines/pdf/bbc_letter_clementireview_tvl_febru
ary2016.pdf
58
The requirements can be found on-line at: http://www.ombudsmanassociation.org/about.php

83

ii.

the BBC should have a ‘Broadcaster First’ complaints system, with ‘stepin’ rights for the Regulator, Ofcom, in exceptional circumstances;

iii.

the BBC unitary Board should have the primary responsibility for
maintaining the high editorial standards of the BBC’s output;

iv.

there should be a single complaints appeal process above the BBC,
operated by Ofcom to ensure its independence; and

v.

appeals would be against the Ofcom Broadcasting Code, and it would be
expected that Ofcom would hold the BBC to the high standards of
‘accuracy and impartiality’ expected by its audience.

50. The proposals meet the criteria set out in paragraph 26 above. They simplify the
complaints system within the BBC, which should provide clarity for complainants
and help inform BBC programme makers. More widely, the proposal to adopt a
'Broadcaster First' system and to remove the duality of regulation between the
BBC Trust and Ofcom would streamline the system. Ofcom would have oversight
of the BBC’s complaints system, with the right of ‘step-in’ to prioritise exceptional
cases. Ofcom’s independence of the BBC would help strengthen consumer
confidence and would help to hold the BBC publicly to account.

84

Appendix 1: Terms of Reference
Independent review of the governance and regulation of the BBC
The BBC Charter Review Public Consultation covers a range of areas that need to be
looked at through the current Charter Review. A number of these relate to the
governance and regulation of the BBC.
“Objectives
1. To conduct a review into the governance and regulation of the BBC and to
make proposals in the context of the 2015-16 Charter Review in relation to:
a. the model of governance and regulation of the BBC,
b. the specific mechanisms of governance and regulation including but not
limited to the Public Value Tests and Service Licences,
c. the way in which the BBC and the bodies that govern and regulate it
engage with licence fee payers and industry, including but not limited to
complaints handling procedures and transparency.
Key considerations:
2. In assessing the objectives above the review will have regard to:
a. the responses to the consultation paper in respect of questions 15-17,
b. principles of good governance, BBC specific principles and other issues
set out in the consultation paper.
Process:
3. The review should consult with the BBC Executives, the BBC Trust, Ofcom
and other relevant parties.
Output:
4. A report setting out proposals for an appropriate regulatory and governance
model for the BBC in the context of the 2015-16 Charter Review including key
findings, conclusions and any other supporting information to be submitted to
the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport in the New Year.”

85

Appendix 2: List of Parties Consulted
Parties Named in the Review Terms of Reference
In addition to officials of the DCMS and Cabinet Office, the Review engaged with the
following organisations as required under the Terms of Reference:
BBC Executive
BBC Trust
Ofcom
Devolved Administrations
Given the formal role of the Devolved Administrations in the Charter Review, set out in
the Memoranda of Understanding between the UK Government and the respective
Governments, the Review also engaged with the Scottish Government, the Welsh
Government and the Northern Ireland Executive.
Organisations
This is a list of organisations that Sir David Clementi engaged with during this Review:
The Authority for Television on Demand (ATVOD)
BT
Channel 4 Corporation
The Commercial Broadcasters Association (CoBA)
Guardian Media Group
ITN
ITV
MG Alba
National Audit Office (NAO)
Radiocentre
Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television (PACT)
S4C
86

Sky PLC
Teledwyr Annibynnol Cymru (TAC)
VIACOM (Channel 5)
Virgin Media Group
Voice of the Listener & Viewer (VLV)
Others
This is a list of individuals Sir David Clementi met with during this Review:
Marcus Agius
Lord Best, Baroness Jay and Lord Goodlad, Chair and members of the House of Lords
Select Committee on Communications
Steven Barnett*
Patrick Barwise*
Robert Beveridge*
Lord Carter of Barnes
Sir William Cash MP, Chair of the European Scrutiny Committee
Ruth Evans
Michael Flood-Page*
Richard Hooper*
Dom Leonis
David Liddiment*
Stephen Lovegrove
Brian McBride
Kip Meek*
Jesse Norman MP, Chair of the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee
Angela Phillips*
Stewart Purvis*
Michael Starks*
Jeanette Steemers*
Dame Sue Street
87

Tim Suter*
Richard Tait*
David Wolfe QC, Press Recognition Panel Chair
*These individuals attended the Review’s evidence gathering roundtable conducted on
27 November 2015.
Events
Sir David Clementi and the Review team also attended conferences, workshops and
other events hosted by a range of parties:
1. BBC Trust: ‘The BBC: Who Governs?’ 1 October 201559
2. LSE Media Policy Project: ‘BBC Governance: Independence, Innovation and
Accountability.’ 13 November 201560
3. Voice of the Listener & Viewer: ‘Public Service Broadcasting – Future Uncertain?’
1 December 201561

59
Further information about the event can be found at: http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/bbctrust/entries/84768e8f-c15f-4caa-b79e2b47cec3b2e4
60
Further information about the event can be found at: http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/files/2011/07/BBC-Governanceworkshop-note.pdf
61
Further information about the event can be found at: http://www.vlv.org.uk/charterreview/conference-autumn2105.html

88

Appendix 3: Table of Recommendations
The proposals of this Review are set out in the Summary of Main Recommendations in pages
7-11. The table below shows how the recommendations of this Review fit within the framework
set out in Annex A of the Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee ‘Report on the Future of
the BBC’ of February 2015.

Constitution

Appointments

Board

Governance/
accountability

Trust model:

Burns panel’s
proposal:

CMS Committee
proposal February
2015:

Clementi Review
proposal:

Oversight body inside
BBC.

External to BBC.

Same as Burns’
recommendation.

BBC Trust is the
BBC’s sovereign
body.

Unitary BBC Board
with non-executive
Chair –
separate external
public-interest
oversight and
regulation i.e. by a
new Public Service
Broadcasting
Commission (PSBC)
and Ofcom.
Government would
have appointed Chair
of PSBC and other
commissioners
following best
practice public
appointment rules.

Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Same as Burns’ and
CMS Committee
recommendations.
Unitary BBC Board
with non-executive
Chair. Separate
external public service
regulation by Ofcom.

Same as Burns’
recommendation. The
Government’s
preferred candidate
for Chair of PSBC
subject to a
parliamentary preappointment hearing.

Ofcom appointments
continue as per the
current arrangement
of public appointment
by Government with
pre-appointment
hearing for the Chair.

Chair of BBC Board
would have been
appointed by
Government following
accepted best
practice.

Same as Burns’
recommendation. The
Government’s
preferred candidate
subject to a
parliamentary preappointment
hearing.
Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Chair of BBC Board
appointed by
Government or
through an
independent process.
Subject to a
parliamentary preappointment hearing.
Same as Burns’ and
CMS Committee
recommendations.

Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Same as Burns’ and
CMS Committee
recommendations.

The PSBC would
neither formulate nor
have to approve the
overall strategy for the
BBC, but would
scrutinise and make
recommendations.

Ofcom would neither
formulate nor have to
approve the overall
strategy for the BBC,
but would have a role
in approving changes
to Licences.

Chairman of the Trust
appointed by the
Government following
Cabinet Office public
appointment process
and now subject to a
pre-appointment
hearing by Culture,
Media and Sport
Committee
Chair of the Executive
Board appointed by
the
Trust.

Chair of the Executive
Board can be
appointed in an
executive or a nonexecutive capacity
(but so far always the
former and the
director general).
BBC Executive has
majority of executive
members.
Trust sets the overall
strategic direction for
the BBC within the
framework set by the
Charter and
Framework
Agreement following
proposals made by
the BBC Executive.

Non-executive Chair
of unitary BBC Board
would have been
known as BBC
Chairman.

Non-executives would
have been in majority
on unitary BBC
Board.
PSBC would have
subjected the BBC’s
strategic plan,
prepared by the BBC
Board, to open and	  
transparent scrutiny.
Plan would have
included broad
objectives of

89

Trust approves highlevel strategy and
budgets in respect of
the BBC’s services.

Trust defines suitable
performance criteria
and measures against
which the effective
promotion of the
Public Purposes are
judged.

Purpose
Remits

Trust assesses the
performance of the
Executive Board in
delivering the BBC’s
services and activities
and holds the
Executive to account
for its performance.
Trust sets multi-year
purpose remits, and
approves strategies
which include highlevel
budgetary allocations.

television and radio
channels, online and
other services, broad
allocation of
expenditure by
service, audiences
and genre.
PSBC would have
approved or rejected
high level strategic
plan and budgets in
respect of the BBC’s
services.
PSBC would have
defined suitable
performance criteria
and measures against
which the
effective promotion of
the Public Purposes
would be judged.
PSBC would have
assessed
performance of
unitary board and
held it to account.

PSBC would
scrutinise and make
recommendations
about BBC Board’s
proposals.

Ofcom would neither
formulate nor have to
approve the BBC
Board’s proposals,
but would scrutinise.

Same as Burns.

Ofcom would have
defined suitable
performance
criteria and measures
against which the
effective promotion of
the Public Purposes
would be judged.
Ofcom to assess
performance of the
unitary Board and
hold it to account. It
would possess a
range of sanctions
including ultimately
financial sanctions.
BBC Board would set
the remit and
budgets, published
through the Workplan
and Creative Remits.
Ofcom would
scrutinise.
Ofcom to issue,
review and report on
Operating Licences.
BBC to propose
changes but Ofcom
has ‘step-in’ rights.

Same as Burns.
PSBC to possess
power to recommend
ultimate funding
sanctions.

PSBC would have
had a similar role to
the Trust.

BBC Board would set
remits and budgets,
PSBC would
scrutinise them and
make
recommendations.
PSBC to review and
report on BBC service
licences, but final
approval made by
BBC Board. PSBC to
possess threat of
recommending
funding sanctions.
PSBC to carry out
public value tests of
BBC services and
review proposals for
new services and
closures. Also able to
initiate
PVTs on existing
services. Expectation
on BBC Board to
adhere to PSBC’s
findings,
backed up by threat
of recommending
funding sanctions.
Scrutiny role but no
formal approval role

Service
Licences/
service reviews

Trust issues service
licences for BBC
services and monitors
compliance with them

PSBC would have
adopted the Trust’s
routine of service
licence and periodic
service reviews.

Public Value
Tests

Trust carries out
public value tests and
decides on whether
the BBC may
introduce new
services or close
existing ones. Ofcom
carries out market
impact assessments.

PSBC same as Trust.
Ofcom’s role
unchanged.

Trust approves
individual strategic or
financial
proposals where they
stand to have
significant
implications for the
fulfilment of the
purpose remits.

Not specified.

Ofcom to carry out
Public Value Tests for
new proposals from
the BBC. Also able to
undertake
investigations which
ultimately may lead to
PVTs.

Ofcom to have
scrutiny role, and able
to undertake review or
PVT if required.

90

Trust, where
appropriate, conducts
investigations into any
activity of the BBC
which it has grounds
to suspect does not
comply with
requirements
supervised by the
Trust.
Commissions valuefor-money
investigations into
specific areas of BBC
activity. NAO
conducts value for
money investigations
by agreement with the
BBC Trust.

Broadly PSBC same
as Trust.

Conduct
investigations into any
activity of the BBC
which causes
concern.

Ofcom can conduct
investigations into any
activity of the BBC
which causes
concern.

Broadly PSBC same
as Trust.

NAO role is out of
scope for the Review.
The BBC unitary
Board will have the
primary role. Ofcom
can scrutinise.

Trust acts as guardian
of the licence fee and
the public interest in
the BBC and delivers
ongoing programme
of public
consultations and
engagement.

PSBC would have
represented the
public interest on all
BBC activities and
public funding
in broadcasting and
delivered ongoing
programme of public
consultation and
engagement.

In conjunction with an
NAO having
unfettered access to
the BBC (but not
commenting on
editorial decisionmaking),
PSBC assesses
value-for-money of
the BBC and its
services.
Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Ofcom responsible for
regulation of
competition,
economic, spectrum
and pan-broadcasting
issues.
Final arbiter of
complaints regarding
content over matters
of impartiality and
accuracy.

Same as existing
arrangement.

Same as existing
arrangement.

PSBC final arbiter of
complaints regarding
content over matters
of impartiality and
accuracy.

Same as CMS
Committee.

Independence

Trust secures the
independence of the
BBC.

PSBC same as Trust.

Level of
Licence Fee

No role.

Contestable
funding

No role.

PSBC would have
recommended to
Government and
Parliament the overall
level of the licence
fee and any other
funding needed to
support the BBC.
PSBC would have
judged the allocation
of the licence fee
between the BBC and
other
broadcasters and
ensured a degree of

Ofcom final arbiter of
complaints regarding
BBC content
including over matters
of impartiality and
accuracy.
PSBC would help
secure the BBC’s
independence but it
would principally fall
to	  the Chair of the
BBC to defend and
champion the BBC’s
position.
Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Out of scope for the
Review.

Value for
money

Regulation

BBC unitary Board
has primary
responsibility for the
interests of Licence
Fee payers, and must
meet the obligations
placed on it by the
Charter and related
documents. Ofcom
regulates in the public
interest as a
safeguard of this.
Same as existing
arrangement.

BBC unitary Board
has primary role.
Ofcom has secondary
role.

Out of scope for the
Review. Ofcom may
be able to perform a
function in relation to
the Licence Fee if
needed.

91

Financial
sanction

Not applicable

plurality in supply of
certain areas of PSB
content
PSBC to possess
potential backstop
power to withhold
some of the licence
fee from the BBC

Same as Burns’
recommendation.

Ofcom to possess a
range of sanctions
including an ultimate
financial sanction.

92

Appendix 4: Oversight of BBC Output

The table below sets out the current and proposed regulatory oversight of the BBC’s
output.
Service

Oversight of
Output
(Current)

Oversight of
Output
(Proposed)

Linear Broadcasting (TV and Radio)
- Accuracy and Impartiality

BBC Trust

Ofcom

Linear Broadcasting (TV and Radio)
- Protection of under 18s
- Harm and Offence Issues
- Avoidance of inciting Crime or
Disorder
- Responsible approach to religious
content
- Prohibition of use of images of a very
brief duration
- Fairness and privacy

BBC Trust/
Ofcom

Ofcom

Video on Demand service (eg. iPlayer, 4OD)62

BBC Trust/
Ofcom

Ofcom

Written on-line content

BBC Trust

BBC/Ofcom 63

Commercial Broadcast Services64

BBC Trust/
Ofcom

Ofcom

Elections and referendums and commercial
references (editorial integrity) in the BBC’s
UK public services

BBC Trust

Ofcom

General Complaints

BBC Trust

BBC

TV Licensing Complaints

BBC Trust

Independent
Ombudsman

Fair Trading Complaints

BBC Trust

Ofcom

62

This function was carried out by The Authority for Television On Demand (ATVOD) up until the 31 December 2015.
As noted in Chapter 4, paragraph 44, the Government should determine whether on-line content should be self- regulated by the
BBC, or passed to Ofcom.
64
Ofcom fully regulates all BBC commercial broadcast services licensed in the UK (such as BBC World News).
63

93

94

95

96

