January 2016

© Crown copyright, 2016
Copyright in the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown.
You may re­use this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence,
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open­government­licence/version/3/​
, write to the
Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email:
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk​
.
If you have any enquiries regarding this document/publication, e­mail
culturalprotectionfund@culture.gov.uk​
or write to us at:
Department for Culture, Media and Sport
4th Floor
100 Parliament Street
London SW1A 2BQ
Telephone: 020 7211 6000
For all our latest news and updates follow us on Twitter: ​
https://twitter.com/DCMS
January 2016

1

Contents
1. The consultation process and how to respond

3

2. Foreword

4

3. Executive summary

6

4. Section I: The proposal for a Cultural Protection Fund

7

5. Section II: Delivering the Fund

15

6. Annex A: The role of culture in international development

22

7. Annex B: Official Development Assistance

24

8. Annex C: Legislative regulation

27

2

The consultation process and how to respond
Basic information
Topic of this
consultation

The UK government’s new Cultural Protection Fund.

Scope of this
consultation

This consultation will help inform the scope and remit of the
new Cultural Protection Fund.

To

Anyone with an interest in this area is welcome to respond.
This consultation is primarily aimed at individual practitioners
and organisations with technical expertise, archaeological
backgrounds, heritage restoration and experience in the field
of cultural heritage protection.

Body responsible for
the consultation

The Department for Culture, Media and Sport is responsible
for the policy and the consultation exercise.

Duration

This consultation will run for 5 weeks. It will begin on 14
January 2016 and end on 19 February 2016.

Enquiries

E­mail: ​
culturalprotectionfund@culture.gov.uk
Telephone: 020 7211 6424

How to respond

Please respond to this consultation via our online form at:
http://goo.gl/forms/6HYwIWLslw
Alternatively, you can respond via e­mail to:
culturalprotectionfund@culture.gov.uk
Postal responses can be sent to:
Joel Rosen
Cultural Property ­ Department for Culture, Media and Sport
4th Floor
100 Parliament Street
London SW1A 2BQ

After the consultation

The views and advice expressed in the responses to this
consultation may be placed in the public domain. Each
response will inform HM government in its planning of the
Cultural Protection Fund.

3

Foreword
Civilisations tell their stories through their art. Throughout history, culture and heritage
have often been targeted for destruction by those who oppose others’ values, beliefs
and ways of life. Removing cultural heritage including valued objects, and stifling
freedom of expression attacks peoples’ shared sense of history and identity, and
undermines social cohesion, making reconciliation less likely.

Unfortunately we are witnessing such acts here and now. Cultural sites and heritage
across the Middle East and North Africa region are at significant risk of attack,
degradation and destruction. The most visible destruction in recent times has been that
of valuable objects and sites in Syria and Iraq, as well as the destruction of a number of
well­known heritage sites in Mali in 2012. Conflict, instability and the rise of
fundamentalist intolerance, puts people’s lives in direct jeopardy and so too the fabric of
society around them.

Cultural heritage has immense symbolic significance, aesthetic importance, and
comprises priceless assets for humanity. It should be recognised that during conflict the
risk to cultural symbols is heightened; yet they are crucial for community and individual
resilience. Protecting these objects and sites will protect potential sources of future
tourism revenue and foster economic development. This will ensure local people
continue to hold a stake in their cultural heritage, which will in turn provide vital longer
term prosperity and security.

4

It was with these considerations in mind that in June 2015 I announced our intention to
establish a Cultural Protection Fund. In addition, I am determined that this government
once and for all ratifies the 1954 Hague Convention and accedes to its two Protocols.
This consultation sets out the key problems we face with cultural heritage destruction,
outlines the government’s proposals for how to tackle this, and welcomes your views
and expertise; especially on the most effective ways in which dedicated funding for
protection and recovery from acts of cultural destruction can be focused. It is imperative
that we focus this funding on the areas that need it most; and while some hugely
important cultural heritage sites seem to have been lost forever, our collective efforts
may contribute towards the recovery from destruction by conserving and restoring what
remains; recording, documenting, and sharing; and supporting education, expertise and
skills. I would like to thank you in advance for your help, and look forward to reading
your responses with interest.

The Rt Hon John Whittingdale MP OBE
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport

5

Executive summary
1. The MENA (Middle East and North Africa) region has recently witnessed
unprecedented and widespread destruction of cultural property and heritage
sites, most notably and devastatingly by Daesh in Iraq and Syria.
2. The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport announced on 21 June 2015
that HM government intends to commit to a new Cultural Protection Fund of £30
million to help protect cultural heritage, provide training to local professionals in
conserving cultural assets, and support programmes using cultural heritage to
help local and national economies through rebuilding heritage and fostering
opportunities for tourism, research and employment. On 25 November 2015 this
funding was secured in the Spending Review.
3. The Fund will support programmes and organisations pursuing these goals
initially in the MENA region. The aim is to launch the Fund in spring 2016.
4. Programmes and organisations bidding into the Fund would have to demonstrate
their alignment with the government’s desired ​
outcomes​
and how they adhere to
the Fund’s ​
principles​
.
5. The intention is that the British Council, a Non­Departmental Public Body of the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) will work in partnership with DCMS
and administer the grant funding to eligible applicants who meet the
requirements.
6. The Fund’s projects will support the delivery of government policies on
International Development and the UK’s commitment to spend 0.7% of Gross
National Income (GNI) as Official Development Assistance (ODA). ​
Details of
programmes supported by the Fund will meet government transparency
requirements.
7. The government is seeking consultation from individuals and organisations with
experience and expertise in the area of cultural heritage protection on some
specific working details of the Fund. This includes its geographical focus and
technical details such as: the scope of items or sites to be protected; the scope of
action; the types of programmes which would be eligible to bid for grants; and the
size of grant funding.

6

The proposal for a Cultural Protection Fund
1.1 Cultural heritage in conflict
From the universally significant to the portable, the local and the buried, cultural
heritage is facing an unprecedented threat. Sites across the Middle East and North
Africa region, especially in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya have been subject to
degradation and destruction with increasing frequency. In our recent history, the most
visible has been the destruction of UNESCO World Heritage Sites, for example, the
Buddhas of Bamiyan in Afghanistan were destroyed by the Taliban in 2001. In 2012
Malian heritage sites also suffered extensive damage from conflict. Most recently there
have been widespread acts of cultural destruction and looting in Iraq and Syria,
shattering local populations and reportedly fuelling illicit trade in antiquities. The loss of
or damage to world cultural heritage is one of the great casualties of conflict ­ not only
from targeted destruction but often simply because of where it is located and what is
happening around it.
While the humanitarian loss from conflict must always remain our first concern, cultural
heritage destruction must be stopped. It is an assault on the identities of the
communities and on a cultural legacy that they have a right to inherit. It not only
deprives them of their history, but also of their opportunities to recover from conflict
socially and economically. These acts are an assault on the whole of civilisation and
humanity, depriving us all of a shared history and global cultural legacy.
The intrinsic value of cultural heritage is immeasurable and its importance does not rest
solely on its aesthetic value. Socially, the ways in which it embodies the identities and
histories of people and communities can support post­war recovery through cohesion
and wellbeing. Economically, cultural heritage sites and buildings also provide
opportunities for sustainable development, tourism and regeneration. They help to
rebuild local and national economies as well as support social development. For
example, in a 2010 study of 500 global heritage sites, the Global Heritage Fund
estimated that they would generate over $100bn annually in revenues for developing
countries by 2025. Furthermore heritage sites act as “magnets for sustainable
development”, creating economic ecospheres around them offering benefits such as
community development, improved health and education, improved infrastructure and

7

private investment.1 These mutual economic and social benefits of culture and heritage
are a concept recognised in the post 2015 Development Agenda as part of the
Sustainable Development Goals (see ​
Annex A​
for more information).
The UK leads the world in international development, and our place in the world is
enhanced by our commitment to supporting global prosperity which, as well as providing
assistance to developing countries, plays a crucial role in our national security and
foreign policy. In addition to promoting economic development, culture can play a role in
peacebuilding and security as well as building resilience to crises, bolstering the case
for the supporting role culture can play in the UK’s current international development
agenda.
Internationally, there is consensus that the immense value of cultural heritage means
that investment in its protection is important for many different reasons. The French
government is mobilising its major cultural and educational institutions to help battle the
atrocities we are now witnessing, and many countries such as the Netherlands already
have a legacy of government supported work to protect culture in danger. Last year
John Kerry, the US Secretary of State, called for action to safeguard the cultural
heritage of Syria and Iraq. The UN Secretary General made a similar call in March
2015, and the European Union and UNESCO are working together to safeguard Syrian
heritage.
Here in the UK, our institutions have played vital roles in cultural heritage protection in
times of conflict. The British Library, for instance, worked with the Iraq National Library
and Archive (INLA) after the 2003 Iraq War to help restore the library and rebuild its
collections through the transfer of digitised archives of the British Library to INLA as well
as collecting donations. Furthermore, since 2003 the British Museum has worked with
Iraq providing conservation, archaeological and curatorial assistance. The British
Museum and the British Army also undertook a joint project with the support of the State
Board for Antiquities and Heritage in Iraq to catalogue damage at a number of sites in
southern Iraq. These efforts are just some of the few that have taken place, particularly
over the last decade, demonstrating the expertise in this area and the capacity of British
institutions to play a role in a field which has traditionally not operated under the
auspices of government.

1

Global
Heritage Fund. ‘​
Saving our vanishing heritage​
’, 2010
​

8

Guillaume Piolle (April 2010) – CC­BY­SA 3.0

Palmyra, formerly a prominent trading post and cultural crossroads of civilisations on
the Silk Road, is currently listed as “in danger” by UNESCO.2 Repeated iconoclastic
attacks by Daesh have severely damaged the site, destroying archways and columns.
Palmyra is an example of a site which is both highly valued by its local population as
a culturally significant site, and which makes a substantial economic contribution. In
2010, UNESCO registered 245,561 visitors to the site, bringing in an estimated
$36.3m per annum.3
Travel and Tourism is estimated to directly contribute to around 4.7% of The Syrian
Arab Republic’s GDP in 2015, down from 8.2% in 2010 ­ much of it driven through
interest in heritage sites like the Old City of Damascus, Aleppo, and Palmyra.4
However, despite this destruction, new technology utilised by small and innovative
organisations has allowed for the recording and display of Palmyra in a virtual space
by using photos taken by visitors to create 3D models in an online database, while at
the same time making them accessible to users around the world.
Such techniques could assist with restoration and reconstruction efforts in subsequent
years after the conflict in the area has subsided. At the same time, they have the
potential to make such sites more accessible by putting 3D models into the hands of
children in classrooms and those of blind or other disabled persons who might not
otherwise be able to experience these sites.

UNESCO.
‘​
Site on Palmyra​
’ 2016
​
Global Heritage Fund. ‘​
Economic impact ­ global heritage, tourism revenues in developing and emerging
countries and regions​
’ 2010
4
World
Travel
and
Tourism
Council. ‘​
Travel & tourism economic impact 2015: Syria​
’ 2015
​
2
3

9

1.2 Our vision
Given the current threat to cultural heritage, it is no surprise that a collective
determination remains present across the UK academic, culture and heritage sectors to
protect and conserve heritage at risk. The UK government shares this drive to find a
way to support and expand upon work already taking place in this field.
The government’s role in protecting cultural heritage will require a concerted and
integrated effort on all fronts and engagement on both a national and international
scale. Responding to, and helping the recovery from, acts of cultural destruction
requires a broad range of expertise and an understanding of the areas in question as
well as the situation on the ground to allow for complementarity and avoid duplication.
For this reason, on 28 October 2015, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and
Sport convened a Cultural Protection Summit bringing together experts, practitioners,
parliamentarians, organisations and charities to explore the measures the UK can take
in supporting cultural heritage protection. The Summit highlighted the concern felt
across the various sectors about the threat to our global heritage and confirmed that
government support was necessary.
Following the summit, the government announced on 25 November 2015 that the UK
will provide international support for cultural heritage in global conflict zones, dedicating
£30 million in Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) funding between 2016 and
2020 to a new Cultural Protection Fund.

1.2.1 The Cultural Protection Fund
The Cultural Protection Fund’s objective is to protect and rebuild cultural heritage,
creating opportunities for economic development through building capacity to foster,
safeguard and promote cultural heritage overseas.
Organisations, charities, and institutions will be able to apply for grant funding to carry
out projects that meet the objective of the Fund and deliver against the Fund outcomes
(illustrated in Table 1). Further information on grant applications can be found in ​
section
2.1.2​
. It is intended that the Fund will support efforts to keep cultural heritage sites and
objects safe, as well as supporting the recording, conservation and restoration of
cultural heritage. The Fund will also provide opportunities to local communities for
training and education, enabling and empowering them in the long term to value, care
for and benefit from their cultural heritage.

10

Geographical scope
Global conflict zones5 in countries eligible to receive Official Development Assistance
(ODA).

Principles
The core principles by which the Fund will operate are listed below and interlink closely
with the outcomes of the Fund listed in Table 1.
● Complementarity:​
Ensuring complementarity with other international cultural
heritage protection programmes.
●​​
Open consultation:​
Stakeholder engagement is encouraged and open to all.
Specific consultation and advice will be sought from multiple national
stakeholders including cultural bodies, government, security and civil society
organisations.
●​​
Evidence­based analysis:​
Interventions based on analysis of the longer term
potential cultural, social and economic benefits as well as the short term need for
protection and preservation of cultural assets.
●​​
Technical relevance: ​
Ensuring a technically relevant approach that anchors the
programme and all initiatives in best practice in cultural heritage protection,
stakeholder engagement and in alignment with the long term strategy.
●​​
Transparency, efficiency and value for money:​
Ensuring the Fund and its
associated projects are managed efficiently, transparently and represent value
for money.

Outcomes
The Fund has three complementary and mutually reinforcing outcomes designed to
achieve the government’s vision and maximise the impact it can have. In the delivery of
these, the UK government and projects funded by grants will be protecting international
treasures for current and future generations. Table 1 presents details of the outcomes
and examples of the respective types of projects which the government envisages being
supported by grants (this list is not exhaustive). It is anticipated that the shape and scale
of individual projects funded will vary according to the specific context and issue the
project is aiming to address. For example, a protection project working in a high risk
area currently suffering from conflict may differ markedly from a conservation and
5

By “global conflict zones” we refer to geographical areas which are currently in conflict, at risk of future
conflict or are suffering the effects of conflict and​
located in countries eligible to receive ODA.
​

11

education project in a relatively stable post conflict area or even a capacity building
project in an area at risk of conflict.
Table 1: Outcomes of the Cultural Protection Fund
Category

Outcome

Example Projects to deliver outcomes

Cultural heritage
protection

Cultural heritage under threat is
researched, documented, conserved
and restored to safeguard against
permanent loss.

● Emergency response programmes
● Dedicated restoration programmes
● Evidence collection/documentation
projects
● Conservation programmes
● Disaster/conflict preparedness
programmes developed
● Research projects
● Creation of virtual heritage sites
● Resilience planning programmes
● Destruction prevention programmes

Training

Local professionals have sufficient
business or specialist skills to be able
to manage and promote cultural assets
which [will] benefit the local economy.

● Assistance with creating marketing
campaigns and business plans
● Training programmes in specific cultural
skills (digitisation, conservation,
restoration)
● Training programmes to ‘train trainers’
● Training and capacity building in business
and management (specific to the tourism
industry)

Advocacy and
education

Local people are able to identify and
value their cultural heritage and have a
good understanding of what can be
done to protect their cultural heritage
and the role it plays in society and the
economy.

● Cultural education programmes or
community engagement on local,
regional, and national levels
● Community, regional, and national
advocacy projects

Grant funding
The government is making £30 million available for the Fund spread across four years
as illustrated in Table 2 below. The allocated funding is channelled through ODA,
meaning that whilst still enabling the objective of the Fund to be met, the funding will be
directed at ODA­eligible countries and must meet additional criteria. ​
Annex B​
explains
more about what ODA is and how it can be used.

12

Table 2: Official Development Assistance funding allocation
Financial Year:
£ (millions):

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

TOTAL

4

6

10

10

30

Nearly £3 million of this Fund has already been awarded to the British Museum to run a
pilot project to train Iraqi archaeologists (see case study below). This is a good example
of the kind of project the Fund could support.

David Iliff (November 2013) ­ CC­BY­SA 3.0

The ​
British Museum​
recently received a £3m grant
pledge over 4.5 years for its proposed programme to
train Iraqi archaeology specialists to help save cultural
heritage artefacts and sites.
The planned outcome of the funding will be “a team of
highly effective and well­equipped heritage sector
professionals who will be capable of effectively
assessing, documenting and stabilising afflicted sites,
and creating a lasting legacy by training others.”
Iraqi archaeologists will be trained in the UK and Iraq
in specialist techniques of preservation and
conservation of cultural heritage sites and artefacts.
These skills will include photographic techniques, 3D
scanning and preservation, and emergency retrieval tactics.

13

The Cultural Protection Fund will be flexibly targeted to areas in global conflict zones
where the need is greatest, the risks are lowest and the benefits are highest. There is
currently a need for support across parts of Northern Africa and parts of the Middle
East. However, the government welcomes views on what the Fund’s priorities should
be, including location, size of grants and how to address security issues.
In the short­to­medium term, the Fund will aim to support nations with significantly
important heritage affected by conflict recover from damage and destruction. In the
long­term, the aim will be to help conserve and restore cultural heritage sites and
property, as well as put in preventative measures to guard against permanent
destruction. The long­term ambition for the Fund will depend upon its success and
evaluations over the coming years. In due course, the government wishes to explore
how other funding streams and programmes of activity can support the work and
objectives of the Cultural Protection Fund. Future consideration may also be given to
grant support going to countries affected by natural disasters where cultural heritage is
at risk or in need of restoration as for example with Nepal and the 2015 earthquake.

|​
Q1: Do you agree or disagree with the proposed overall approach to the
Cultural Protection Fund as outlined in Section 1?
|​
Q1a:​
Please provide any comments to explain your answer to Q1.
|​
Q2: Do you agree or disagree with the principles of the Fund?
|​
Q2a: ​
Please provide any comments to explain your answer to Q2.
|​
Q3: Table 1 provides a list of potential projects under each of the Fund
outcomes. Is there anything that we have not considered?

14

Delivering the Fund
It is essential that the Cultural Protection Fund is well designed and delivered in a
manner that will secure its success in helping safeguard the world’s cultural heritage for
future generations. This section seeks your views and expertise on the design and
delivery of the Fund to inform policy development and immediate and longer­term
priorities for the Fund.

2.1 Administration of the Fund

One of the Fund’s principles is to ensure complementarity with existing initiatives both in
the UK and internationally. In order to achieve this, we would be keen to know about
similar grant funds that already exist; any programmes and projects that are doing
similar work domestically and internationally; and if there are promising programmes
and projects which are as yet un­ or underfunded which the Fund could potentially
support.

|​
Q4: Please tell us about any examples of existing successful cultural
heritage protection initiatives operating in conflict zones in ODA
eligible countries.
2.1.1 Administrative body
Although overall accountability for the Fund will lie with DCMS, the day­to­day
management of the Fund will be the responsibility of the British Council. The British
Council and DCMS will work in partnership to develop a system for managing the Fund
which adheres to the principles of the Fund and draws in additional expertise to
complement the existing skills base at the British Council. DCMS will allocate the
Cultural Protection Fund in a form of a grant to the British Council. The full £30m6 of the

6

£3m of which has already been awarded to the British Museum ­ see section 1.2.1

15

Cultural Protection Fund will be available for cultural protection programmes as the
British Council will provide administrative resources to support the Fund management.

The British Council is the UK’s international organisation for cultural relations and
education opportunities leading UK engagement with cultural and educational sectors
overseas, and is the Arts strategic lead for Culture and Development for the UK. It is a
UK Non Departmental Public Body (NDPB) and a charity incorporated by Royal
Charter. Operating in 110 countries across the world, their presence on the ground
extends across the MENA region and to many countries eligible for Official
Development Assistance.
The British Council’s experience in culture and development include the ‘Golden
Thread’ and ‘Surge for Growth’ programmes which address security and stability, and,
prosperity and development, operating, for example, in Myanmar, Tunisia, Egypt,
Nigeria, South Sudan, Ukraine and Afghanistan. The British Council’s broad base and
scope of international work mean that it has established effective monitoring and
evaluation, risk assessment and duty of care policies appropriate to work in states
affected by conflict.
In 2014/15 the British Council managed £100m of ODA funding and has experience
managing both development programmes and large grant funds. The International
Commission of Aid Impact (ICAI) has positively assessed the British Council’s
management of ODA funding.

2.1.2 Application process and grants
The Cultural Protection Fund will be a grants fund. The exact scope and shape of the
criteria for grants will be outlined in the grant guidance which will be issued as part of a
call for applications which will be in the spring when the Fund is launched.

16

However, more generally, applicants will be expected to demonstrate through the
application process that:
● their project meets at least one of the outcomes;
● their project meets project delivery (including reporting, monitoring and
evaluation) requirements;
● they can clearly outline the issue which needs to be addressed;
● there is evidence that the issue exists and that the project can meet this need;
● their project is appropriate to the local context; and
● it has been developed in agreement and/or partnership with local communities.
We would expect that organisations are able to demonstrate that they have the
necessary specialist, technical and financial capacity, experience and expertise to carry
out the projects in the chosen context as well as the necessary procedures in place to
ensure sound monitoring and evaluation, risk management, financial management,
reporting and duty of care. Figure 1 provides a provisional outline of the stages of the
application process.
Figure 1: Example of the application process

Grant awards will be a competitive process and take place at stages throughout the four
years funding has been secured for. It is anticipated that a call for the first round of grant
applications will be issued in April 2016 when the Fund is launched, with a deadline of
around June 2016 for applications. The intention is to award the first batch of grants in
July 2016. We recognise that this timetable is tight and would welcome applications for
established projects requiring funding as well as applications for new projects able to
begin work in the first year of the Fund. It is likely that there will be no restriction on the
length of a project applying for a grant as funding could be awarded across multiple
years.

17

Provisional 2016 timeline
This provisional timeline reflects the government’s ambitions to launch the Cultural
Protection Fund. This will be confirmed following the analysis of consultation responses.
January/February

April

June

July

Consultation
(Written and
workshops)

Launch of the
Fund: Guidance
issued and call for
grant applications

Applications
deadline for grants

Grants considered
and allocated

Grant size
We recognise that both small and large sums of funding can bring about great changes
and therefore do not want to exclude potential projects from receiving a grant because
of limitations to the size of grants on offer. We welcome stakeholder input on the range
of grant sizes the Fund could offer applicants.

|​
Q5: Should there be a minimum and maximum value for grant awards?
|​
Q5a: If yes to Q5, what would you recommend the minimum grant award
to be (in £)?
|​
Q5b: If yes to Q5, what would you recommend the maximum grant award
to be (in £)?
|​
Q6: Please provide any additional comments on question 5.
2.1.3 Project monitoring and evaluation
Project monitoring and evaluation is a government requirement and is crucial to
ensuring that grant funding is allocated efficiently and to where it is most needed.
The Fund’s administering body will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation of
projects. This will take place regularly to ensure the viability of projects and that funding
is directed most effectively. It is expected that project evaluation will require reporting

18

against measures which are linked to the fund outcomes and with assessment of the
realised project benefits.
We are aware that there are difficulties in measuring some of the benefits linked to the
outcomes of likely projects under the Fund. For example social development and
wellbeing may be harder to capture than other benefits such as economic impact.

|​
Q7: In your experience what are the most effective ways of monitoring
and evaluating the success of projects, especially outcomes which
may be harder to capture?
|​
Q8: Do you support our overall approach to the Cultural Protection Fund
as outlined in Section 2.1?
|​
Q8a: Please provide any further comments to support your answer to
question 8.

2.2 Geographical focus and prioritisation

The government intends that grants will be allocated according to need and risk for use
in global conflict zones. The Fund must also remain flexible in response to the changing
needs of the international landscape as countries move in and out of conflict or suffer
from natural disasters. See ​
Annex B​
for a list of ODA­eligible countries.

|​
Q9: Which regions or ODA­eligible countries do you think grant funding
should be targeted towards and would have the most benefit in the
first year of the Fund’s operation?
|​
Q10: Which regions or ODA­eligible countries do you think grant funding
should be targeted towards and would have the most benefit in the
subsequent years of​
​
the Fund’s operation?

19

2.3 Security
Many of the countries affected by conflict that are in most need of support to protect
their cultural heritage present challenges due to instability which raises a security risk to
anyone carrying out projects in these areas. We would like to assess the scope for both
direct and indirect interventions in potentially dangerous areas in which the need is
greatest, which could include, for example, the emergency retrieval of artefacts,
on­the­ground digital capturing of built and portable heritage at immediate risk of
destruction or remote 3D scanning.

|​
Q11:​
What are your views on the feasibility of working in potentially
dangerous areas? Please include any advice on how the Fund could
support interventions in these scenarios and examples of previous
initiatives.

2.4 The wider international agenda
All applicants for grants will be expected to demonstrate that their project is appropriate
to the local context and, where possible, developed in agreement and/or partnership
with the local communities. In addition, there are certain aspects that we are required to
specifically consider by law (see ​
Annex C​
), or that may be of such importance that
special consideration is desirable.
The ​
International Development (Gender Equality) Act 2014​
p​
​
r​
o​
v​
i​
d​
e​
s that before
granting development assistance, the Secretary of State shall have regard to:
“the desirability of providing development assistance that is likely to contribute to
reducing poverty in a way which is likely to contribute to reducing inequality
between persons of different gender” 7 and “to the desirability of providing
assistance...in a way that takes account of any gender­related differences in the
needs of those affected by the disaster or emergency.”8

7
8

UK government. ‘​
International Development (Gender Equality) Act 2014​
’, 1(2)(1A) 2014
UK government. ‘​
International Development (Gender Equality) Act 2014​
’, 1(3)(2) 2014

20

Other equalities issues not specifically addressed by the law relating to international
development that we may wish to refer to in the grant guidance may include ethnic,
class, religious or sectarian differences. This could be in general or with specific
reference to particular localised contexts.

|​
Q12: Which issues relating to gender should we be aware of? Please
make reference to any specific examples that you would like us to
consider.
|​
Q12a: How could this be monitored?
|​
Q13: Are there any other specific requirements or conditions that should
be applied to programmes applying for grant funding which you
think we should be aware of? Please make reference to any specific
examples that you would like us to consider.

21

Annex A: The role of culture in international
development
The UK provides a significant amount of aid for populations in need around the world,
which comes from a dedicated budget. However, more recently there has been a shift in
emphasis from humanitarian aid to sustainable development, and the empowerment of
local communities to provide for themselves through a small initial investment.
While direct aid may be useful and indeed essential for humanitarian emergencies, it is
only the initial phase of a larger and more sustainable long­term strategy.

Sustainable Development Goals
The transition from the Millennium Development Goals to the 2030 Agenda for
International Development has led to an increased focus on the need to ensure
sustainable development via 17 goals and 169 targets.9 The UK government has played
a key role in supporting and developing the Sustainable Development Goals. The
Cultural Protection Fund’s objectives and outcomes will work to contribute to this
agenda, through the following goals and targets:
● Goal 4: ​
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all.
○ 4.7 ​
By 2030, ​
ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills
needed to promote sustainable development, including​
, among
others, through education for sustainable development and sustainable
lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace
and non­violence, global citizenship and ​
appreciation of cultural
diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development
● Goal 8:​
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all.
○ 8.9​
By 2030,​
devise and implement policies to promote sustainable
tourism​
that creates jobs and promotes local culture and products.
● Goal 12:​
Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns.
○ 12.b​
Develop and implement tools to monitor sustainable development
impacts for sustainable tourism that creates jobs and promotes local
culture and products
9

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. ‘​
Sustainable Development Goals​
’ 2016

22

The government’s priorities for international development
Culture plays a significant role in international development. The government has
committed itself to addressing the following priority issues for its spending of UK Official
Development Assistance (ODA):10
● Strengthening global peace, security and governance: ​
the government will
invest more to tackle the causes of instability, insecurity and conflict, and to
tackle crime and corruption. This is fundamental to poverty reduction overseas,
and will also strengthen our own national security at home.
● Strengthening resilience and response to crises:​
this includes more support
for ongoing crises including that in Syria and other countries in the Middle East
and North Africa region, more science and technology spend on global public
health risks such as antimicrobial resistance, and support for efforts to mitigate
and adapt to climate change.
● Promoting global prosperity: ​
the government will use Official Development
Assistance (ODA) to promote economic development and prosperity in the
developing world. This will contribute to the reduction of poverty and also
strengthen UK trade and investment opportunities around the world.
● Tackling extreme poverty and helping the world’s most vulnerable: ​
the
government will strive to eliminate extreme poverty by 2030, and support the
world’s poorest people to ensure that every person has access to basic needs,
including prioritising the rights of girls and women. This will build security, stability
and opportunity that will benefit us all.

HM Treasury and the Department for International Development. ‘​
UK aid: tackling global challenges in the
national interest​
’ 2015
10

23

Annex B: Official Development Assistance
Official Development Assistance11
In 2013, the government achieved its commitment of spending 0.7% of GNI (£11.4bn)
on Official Development Assistance (ODA),12 which must have the “promotion of the
economic development and welfare of developing countries as its main objective.”13
Overseas Development Assistance is defined by the OECD as “those flows to countries
and territories on the ​
DAC List of ODA Recipients​
and ​
to multilateral institutions​
which
are:
i. Provided by official agencies, including state and local governments, or by
their executive agencies; and
ii. each transaction of which:
a) is administered with the promotion of the economic development and
welfare of developing countries as its main objective; and
b) is concessional in character and conveys a grant element of at least 25
per cent (calculated at a rate of discount of 10 per cent).”

Development Assistance Committee list of ODA recipients
Least
developed
countries

Other low income
countries

Lower Middle
Income Countries
and Territories

Upper Middle
Income Countries
and Territories

Afghanistan
Angola
Bangladesh
Benin
Bhutan
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Central African
Republic
Chad
Comoros

Democratic People's
Republic of Korea
Kenya
Tajikistan
Zimbabwe

Armenia
Bolivia
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Egypt
El Salvador
Georgia
Ghana
Guatemala
Guyana

Albania
Algeria
Antigua and
Barbuda​
²
Argentina
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belize
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil

Adapted from the Development Assistance Committee’s list of ODA recipients (2014­2016). OECD. ‘​
DAC
list of ODA recipients​
’ 2016.
12
House
of Commons. ‘​
House of Commons research paper: The 0.7% aid target​
’ 2014
​
13
OECD,
‘
O
​
fficial
development
assistance
–
definition
and
coverage
’
​
2016
​
11

24

Democratic
Republic of the
Congo
Djibouti
Equatorial
Guinea​
¹
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea­Bissau
Haiti
Kiribati
Lao People's
Democratic
Republic
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Niger
Rwanda
Sao Tome and
Principe
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Timor­Leste
Togo
Tuvalu
Uganda
Vanuatu​
¹
Yemen
Zambia

Honduras
India
Indonesia
Kosovo
Kyrgyzstan
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Philippines
Samoa
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Syrian Arab
Republic
Tokelau
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
West Bank and
Gaza Strip

Chile​
²
China (People's
Republic of)
Colombia
Cook Islands
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Fiji
Former Yugoslav
Republic of
Macedonia
Gabon
Grenada
Iran
Iraq
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Lebanon
Libya
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mexico
Montenegro
Montserrat
Namibia
Nauru
Niue
Palau
Panama
Peru
Saint Helena
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines
Serbia
Seychelles
South Africa
Suriname

25

Thailand
Tonga
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uruguay​
²
Venezuela
Wallis and Futuna

(1)​
The United Nations General Assembly resolution 68/L.20 adopted on 4 December 2013 decided that
Equatorial Guinea will graduate from the least developed country category three and a half years after the
adoption of the resolution and that Vanuatu will graduate four years after the adoption of the resolution.
(2) Antigua and Barbuda, Chile and Uruguay exceeded the high income country threshold in 2012 and 2013.
In accordance with the DAC rules for revision of this List, all three will graduate from the List in 2017 if they
remain high income countries until 2016.

26

Annex C: Legislative regulation
The Cultural Protection Fund, in its distribution of ODA, shall be subject to and
compliant with the following legislation:
Legislation

Function and Meaning for the Fund

International Development Act 2002

Regulates and grants powers to agencies
involved in disbursing development
assistance, and commits the UK to global
poverty reduction as a key priority.

International Development (Reporting
and Transparency) Act 2006

Ensures that development assistance
funds are spent transparently and
accountably.

The International Development (Official
Development Assistance Target) Act
2015 (0.7 Act)

Commits the UK government to spending
0.7% of GNI on foreign aid.

International Development (Gender
Equality) Act 2014

Commits UK government agencies to
address gender inequality when
disbursing funds for development
assistance.

Bribery Act 2010

Prohibits corrupt practices, with special
provisions preventing bribery of foreign
officials.

Terrorism Act 2000 (TACT)

Defines terrorists and acts of terror, and
prohibits the funding thereof.

27

