Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2015–16
1 May 2015 to 30 April 2016

Presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 10 (1) (a) of the Export Control Act 2002

February 2017

© Crown copyright 2017
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government
Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-governmentlicence/version/3 or
write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew,
London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you
will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Send any enquiries regarding this publication to us at
enquiries@culture.gov.uk
Print ISBN 9781474138734
Web ISBN 9781474138741
ID 10111608

02/17

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the Williams Lea Group on behalf of the Controller
of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Cover image: A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets

Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2015–16
1 May 2015 to 30 April 2016

I

Report of the Secretary of State

II	Report of the Reviewing Committee
on the Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 3

Annual report to Parliament
By the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport

The Reviewing Committee on
the Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest
I am pleased to lay before Parliament the twelfth
annual report on the operation of the export controls
on objects of cultural interest, as required by section
10(1) of the Export Control Act 2002. The report covers
the period 1 May 2015 to 30 April 2016. This is the
62nd year that the Government has published the
annual report of the Reviewing Committee. Once again,
we are highly indebted to the Committee, its expert
advisers and staff at the Arts Council for their hard work
in ensuring that items of sufficient importance to us
as a nation are identified and an opportunity provided
for them to remain in the UK.
The UK’s export controls are aimed at striking a fair
balance between the need to protect the best of our
national heritage, the rights of owners and the
encouragement of a thriving art market. The system
acts therefore as an important safety net to protect the
most important objects, whilst allowing the majority of
cultural objects to be freely exported. I am delighted
to know that thanks to the work of the Reviewing
Committee and the expert advisers and independent
assessors who support them, we have once again
been broadly successful in achieving that aim.
I am pleased to read that, of the 21 works of art and
cultural objects found to meet the Waverley criteria and
subsequently placed under temporary export deferral,
nine items, worth £7 million, were saved from going
abroad. All of the saved items are remarkable in their
own way and it is always difficult to single out any
personal favourites. However, purely in terms of their
elegance and beauty or the story they tell, I have been
particularly struck by several items. The steel and silver
dagger presented to Colonel TE Lawrence after his
victory at Aqaba is absolutely iconic and a part of
Lawrence’s enduring image as one of the most
extraordinary figures of the 20th century. The National
Army Museum must be delighted to have added it to
their collection.

4 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Another extraordinary person but for different reasons
is John Logie Baird who was responsible for engineering
the first ever transatlantic transmission of television
pictures. It is extremely fitting that his archive has been
saved for the University of Glasgow where it will inspire
future pioneering engineers.
The watercolour of Nonsuch Palace, one of the
Renaissance period’s most stunning buildings, has
been in the UK for 400 years. Sadly the building was
dismantled in the 17th century but there are a number
of surviving depictions of the palace including this
wonderful watercolour by Joris Hoefnagel to remind
us of its former glory and I am delighted it is to stay
in the UK.
I take note of the Committee’s comments regarding
a number of policy issues. It is clearly important and
necessary for institutions interested in acquiring an
export-deferred item to begin provenance research as
soon as possible and I welcome the Chair’s intention to
highlight this at meetings and to point out that it might
influence the Committee’s recommendation on the
deferral period. I also welcome the Committee’s
intention to keep under review cases where export
licence applications are withdrawn at the last minute
and to emphasise that undertakings to accept matching
offers should not be given lightly. The Government
remains committed to saving as many of the most
important cultural objects as possible for the nation.
It is encouraging to hear that, during this reporting
period, a number of export-deferred items have
received multiple expressions of interest and hope that,
in line with the Guidance for exporters, owners will
choose to accept the offer which provides the greatest
public benefit.

The Government is profoundly grateful to Sir Hayden
Phillips and the members of the Reviewing Committee
who give so generously of their time and play a major
role in helping to save national treasures from being lost
overseas. In particular, I would like to thank Christopher
Wright whose term of appointment came to an end
during the year and welcome Peter Barber to the
Committee. I would also like to thank the specialists,
academics and members of the art trade for their
contribution to the process. Without their commitment
and that of the world-class experts in museums and the
many volunteers and supporters throughout the UK,
none of this would be possible.

Karen Bradley
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 5

Operation of the Control
The following figures cover the period of this report (1 May 2015 to 30 April 2016).
1 May 2014 –
30 April 2015
(a)

Number of applications for individual export licences1

(b)

1 May 2015 –
30 April 2016

12,852

10,585

Number of above applications which were for manuscripts,
documents or archives

1,600

1,798

(c)

Number of items licensed after reference to expert advisers
on the question of national importance

31,083

34,999

(d)

Total value of items in (c)

£1,983,542,466

£1,480,594,585

(e)

Number of Open Individual Export Licences (OIEL) in operation
having been issued in previous years to regular exporters for the
export of (i) manuscripts, documents, archives and photographic
positives and negatives; (ii) objects imported into the UK in the
past 50 years; (iii) UK origin coins; (iv) the temporary export of
a Rolls Royce; (v) the temporary export of objects in soil samples
from archaeological sites in Northern Ireland; (vi) the temporary
export of objects owned or under the control of national
institutions or institutions holding designated collections

66

67

(f)

Number of items licensed after the Export Licensing Unit
was satisfied of import into the UK within the past 50 years

57,693

30,541

(g)

Total value of items in (f)

£10,745,479,486

£8,020,208,014

(h)

Number of items in (f) which were manuscripts, documents
or archives

900

1,045

(i)

Total value of items in (h)

£86,456,724

£200,038,074

(j)

Number of items given an EU licence without reference to
the question of national importance because they were either:
valued at below the appropriate UK monetary limit2; owned by
a museum or gallery that had an OIEL; manuscripts valued at
£1,500 or less or coins valued at £500 or less and the exporter
held a valid OIEL; musical instruments exported for less than
three months for use in the course of work by a professional
musician; a motor vehicle exported for less than three months
for social, domestic or pleasure purposes; a foreign registered
motor vehicle exported following importation for less than three
months for pleasure purposes; imported into the UK in the last
50 years and were being exported on a temporary basis

3,501

6,191

(k)

Total value of items in (j)

£3,980,590,056

£2,365,008,475

One application may cover several items.
	In some cases, an EU export licence may be required to export items that are valued below the relevant UK
monetary limit. In such cases, an EU licence will normally be given without referring the licence application to
the expert adviser on the question of national importance.

1
2

6 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Report of the Reviewing Committee
on the Export of Works of Art
and Objects of Cultural Interest
1 May 2015 to 30 April 2016
To:
The Rt Hon Karen Bradley MP,
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport
62nd Report of
the Reviewing Committee

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 7

Reviewing Committee on the
Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest
Members of the Committee 2015–16
Sir Hayden Phillips (Chair)
Mr Richard Calvocoressi
Ms Philippa Glanville
Mr Peter Barber (appointed 1 August 2015)
Mr Aidan Weston-Lewis
Mr Lowell Libson
Ms Leslie Webster
Mr Christopher Rowell
Dr Christopher Wright (appointment expired 31 July 2015)

Secretary
Mr Peter Rowlands

Postal Address
Secretary
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art
and Objects of Cultural Interest
Arts Council England
21 Bloomsbury Street
London WC1B 3HF
A register of interests held by Committee members is posted
on Arts Council England’s website: www.artscouncil.org.uk

8 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Contents
		
Report
Part I		
Reviewing Committee Report for 2015–16
Part II		Operation of the Control

11
13

		 Individual export cases
		2015–16
Case 1		
Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château d’If by Paul Cézanne
Case 2		
Baird Phonovision disc and ephemera
Case 3		
An East View of the Great Cataract of Niagara by Captain Thomas Davies
Case 4
	
Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet by Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn
Case 5		
Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze strip brooch
Case 6		
Large bowl by Hans Coper
Case 7		
A ‘builder’s’ ship model of RMS Mauretania
Case 8		
St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child from the workshop of Dieric Bouts the Elder
Case 9 		
Nobel Prize Medal and Citation awarded to Hans Krebs
Case 10		
Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap by Pontormo
Case 11		
A Pair of Charles II Silver Andirons
Case 12		
A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets
Case 13		
Portrait of a Boy by Ferdinand Bol
Case 14		
Arab Jambiya dagger and scabbard owned by TE Lawrence
Case 15		
Arab robes owned by TE Lawrence
Case 16		
Femme, a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti
Case 17		
Nonsuch Palace from the South by Joris Hoefnagel
Case 18		Medieval King Robert the Bruce of Scotland and Dunfermline Abbey
Cokete Seal Matrix Pair
Case 19		
Venice Triumphant, a drawing by Paolo Veronese
Case 20		
A pair of pietre dure table tops
Case 21		
A set of nine portraits of the Smythe Family by Cornelius Ketel
Case 22		
An Italian pietre dure table top with the arms of the Grimani Family
Case 23		
A marine ivory chess piece
Case 24		
Portrait of a Silversmith by Thomas de Keyser
Case 25		
Two paintings by Bernardo Bellotto: The Fortress of Königstein from the North/South

17
20
22
25
26
28
30
31
35
37
40
43
44
47
48
50
53
54
56
58
60
63
65
66
67

Full list of plates available at Appendix L, page 90

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 9

		Appendices
A		
Report on additional funding for acquisitions
B		
History of export controls in the UK
C		Terms of reference of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of
Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
D		Membership of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest during 2015–16
E		
List of independent assessors who attended meetings during 2015–16
F		
Value of items placed under deferral (2006–07 to 2015–16)
		
i) for which permanent licences were issued and
		
ii) which were purchased by UK institutions or individuals
G		Items licensed for export after reference to expert advisers for advice
as to national importance
H		Applications considered and deferred on the recommendation of the
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of
Cultural Interest, 2006–07 to 2015–16
I		Composition of the Advisory Council on the Export of Works of Art
and Objects of Cultural Interest
J		
Further reading
K		Membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents and Archives
during 2015–16
L		
Full list of plates

10 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

69
76
78
78
81
83
84
86
88
89
89
90

Part I:

Reviewing Committee
Report for 2015–16
1 May 2015 to 30 April 2016

Introduction
It has been an extremely busy and eventful period for
the Reviewing Committee. We considered 25 cases
covering an extraordinary range of works of art and
cultural objects at 10 meetings over the year. At the
Committee’s recommendation the Secretary of State
put in place temporary export deferrals for a wide array
of ‘national treasures’ including a rare and evocative
watercolour of Henry VIII’s lost Palace of Nonsuch; an
archive documenting the first ever transatlantic
transmission of television pictures by John Logie Baird;
an elegant white plaster sculpture by Alberto Giacometti
and an iconic curved silvergilt dagger presented to
‘Lawrence of Arabia’ following the taking of Aqaba
in 1917. The earliest item the Committee considered
against the Waverley criteria, an exquisite Anglo-Saxon
Brooch from the late 8th century AD, was nearly 1200
years older than the most recent – a sculptural bowl
made by the influential émigré ceramic artist Hans
Coper in 1955. The Secretary of State and permanent
Committee members are indebted to a host of
specialists, academics and members of the art
trade, who generously give their time, adding to
the Committee’s depth of expertise, without whom
the system could not function as well as it does.
Twenty-one works with a value of £116.58 million
(£116,580,840) were temporarily deferred from
export while efforts were made to retain them. We
are extremely pleased that nine items are now in
collections and archives accessible to the general
public from Oxford to Glasgow.
Provenance information
We would like to emphasise the importance of
applicants providing full provenance information as this
is essential in establishing that the Arts Council is the
competent authority to issue a licence for export outside
the EU for the purposes of Council Regulation (EC) No
116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of
cultural goods.

In last year’s Annual Report we stated that potential
acquiring institutions often approach funding bodies for
financial assistance in their attempts to acquire export
deferred items. Once an expression of interest in raising
funds has been received there is an expectation that the
owner of the item will allow provenance information
to be provided to the relevant funding bodies so the
necessary due diligence procedures can be completed.
The Committee feels that this is an extremely important
issue and we have clarified our procedures to reflect
this. At all future meetings the Chair will notify
applicants that if permission is not given it can prejudice
the institution’s chances of successfully concluding the
purchase. This may also give grounds for considering
whether the deferral period should be extended or a
recommendation made to the Secretary of State that
the export licence application be refused.
The practice of withdrawing licence applications
We previously reported that it was encouraging that
the last case of the withdrawal of an application
(following receipt of a serious expression of interest
and reconfirmation of willingness to accept such an
offer), thereby preventing a potential acquisition, was
in 2010–11. This year there have been a few cases
where the owner has withdrawn their application after
being made aware of a serious expression of interest in
raising funds or an offer to purchase.
The Committee understands that individual
circumstances may vary; each situation is different
and may present specific considerations that affect
whether an applicant can, in good faith, agree to
accept a matching offer. Such cases, however, present
challenging dilemmas. While it would be unwise to
draw any general policy conclusion on the basis of
a small handful of individual cases we do ask that
applicants give careful consideration before formally
declaring in the case hearing that they are prepared
to accept a matching offer from a purchaser who will
retain the object in the UK. The Committee remains
of the opinion that such an undertaking should not
be given lightly and it will continue to monitor these
delicate issues closely.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 11

Applying for an export licence and the
Committee’s workload
We note that there has been some frustration as to the
length of time which has elapsed before the Committee
has had an opportunity to consider some applications.
While the Committee remains open to the possibility of
reviewing its procedures in the event of a demonstrable
and prolonged change in the quantity and timing of
objections, we would ask applicants to bear in mind
that there are logistical limitations on the number of
cases that can currently be considered and that autumn
tends to be a particularly busy period. We also ask that
applicants consider carefully whether they wish to apply
for a temporary or permanent export licence.

Committee members, expert advisers,
independent assessors and the administration
of the system of export control
The Committee would like once more to thank the
expert advisers and the independent assessors for their
vital expertise, time and commitment. The role they all
play is essential to the proper working of the system.
We would also like to thank the Department for Culture,
Media and Sport (DCMS) and the Secretariat to the
Committee and the Export Licensing Unit at the Arts
Council who administer the system on the Secretary
of State’s behalf, without whose efforts the system of
export control could not function in the manner in
which it does.

Procedure for dealing with multiple offers/
expressions of interest
We have seen the emergence of a new and most
welcome occurrence in this reporting period, where
multiple expressions of interest and offers to purchase
individual export-deferred items are received. While it is
gratifying to have so much interest, it can also give rise
to additional administrative burdens.

The Reviewing Committee has UK-wide competence for
the Export Control System for Works of Art and Cultural
Goods and in carrying out that role is conscious of the
importance of the distinct traditions of all parts of the UK.

Where multiple expressions of interest and offers to
purchase are received, our current position, which may
be reviewed if this becomes a common occurrence, is
that the initial deferral period is used to compile all
serious expressions of interest in raising funds/any offers
to purchase. The Secretariat then passes this information
to the owner’s representatives at the end of the initial
deferral period when they are asked to confirm again
that they will accept a matching offer and to choose
from which source. As stated in our Guidance for
exporters, where offers are received from both public
and private sources the Secretary of State hopes that
owners will accept the offer which provides the greater
public benefit. The purpose of the export control system
is to provide an opportunity for the UK to retain cultural
goods judged to be national treasures, so in the event
that the owner’s chosen source is unable to complete
within the second deferral period, the other interested
parties will be kept informed in the hope that they will
be able to acquire the item.

12 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

There was one change of membership during 2015–16,
with the conclusion of Christopher Wright’s second four
year term and the appointment of Peter Barber as his
successor. Christopher’s term of appointment expired on
31 July 2015. We would like to record our appreciation
for his dedication and valued contribution over the last
eight years. Peter Barber was formerly Head of
Cartographic and Topographic Materials at the British
Library. He has many exhibitions and publications to
his name, and was awarded an OBE for services to
cartography and topography in 2012. He is VicePresident of the Hakluyt Society and of the Hornsey
Historical Society, and a Trustee of the Hereford Mappa
Mundi Trust. He is also a Council Member of the Society
of Antiquaries’ Library and Collections Committee and
a past Council Member of the Royal Numismatic and
British Art Medal Societies. He has been appointed to
the Reviewing Committee for four years, effective from
1 August 2015.
A full list of members can be found at the beginning
of this report and brief biographies are included in
Appendix D.
History and operation of the export control system
A full history of export controls in the UK and their
rationale is at Appendix B. The terms of reference of
the Reviewing Committee are at Appendix C.

Part II:

Operation of the Control
During the period covered by this report (1 May 2015
to 30 April 2016):
• there were 10,585 applications for export licences
• 1,798 of these applications were for the export of
manuscripts, documents or archives
• the applications covered a total of 71,731 items
• 34,999 items with a value of £1.48 billion
(£1,480,594,585) were issued with export licences
after they had been referred to expert advisers
• 67 Open Individual Export Licences (OIEL) were in
operation over this period: a) nine for the export of
manuscripts, documents, archives and photographic
positives and negatives; b) four for the export of
goods over 50 years of age imported into the UK
within the past 50 years; c) one for the export of
UK-origin coins; d) one for the temporary export
of a Rolls-Royce; e) one for the temporary export of
objects in soil samples from archaeological sites in
Northern Ireland and f) 51 for the temporary export
of objects over 50 years of age owned by or under
the control of a national institution or an institution
holding a designated collection

Cases referred to the Committee
In 2015–16, 25 cases were considered by the
Committee because the appropriate expert adviser
objected to the proposed export on the grounds of
national importance. This is a fraction of the items
covered by the export licensing system and shows that
expert advisers think very carefully before referring
cases to us. The Committee will designate an object
as a ‘national treasure’ if it considers that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune on one or more of
the following three grounds, collectively known as the
‘Waverley criteria’:
History

Aesthetics

Scholarship

Is it so closely
connected with
our history and
national life?

Is it of
outstanding
aesthetic
importance?

Is it of
outstanding
significance for
the study of
some particular
branch of art,
learning or
history?

Waverley 1

Waverley 2

Waverley 3

• 30,541 items with a value of £8.02 billion
(£8,020,208,014) were issued with export licences
after the Export Licensing Unit was satisfied that they
had been imported into the United Kingdom within
the past 50 years. 1,045 of these items with proof
of import were manuscripts, documents or archives,
with a total value of £200.04 million (£200,038,074)
• 6,191 items with a value of £2.37 billion
(£2,365,008,475) were given an EU licence without
reference to the question of national importance
because they were either: valued at below the
appropriate UK monetary limit; owned by a museum
or gallery that has an OIEL; manuscripts valued at
£1,500 or less or coins valued at £500 or less and
the exporter holds a valid OIEL; musical instruments
exported for less than three months for use in the
course of work by a professional musician; motor
vehicles exported for less than three months for social,
domestic or pleasure purposes; foreign-registered
motor vehicles exported following importation for less
than three months for pleasure purposes; imported
into the UK in the last 50 years and being exported
on a temporary basis

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 13

Items found to be national treasures
Twenty-two items were found to meet at least one
of the Waverley criteria:
Case 1 – Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château d’If
by Paul Cézanne
Case 2 – Baird Phonovision disc and ephemera
Case 3 – An East View of the Great Cataract of Niagara
by Captain Thomas Davies
Case 4 – Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet by
Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn
Case 5 – Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze strip brooch
Case 6 – Large bowl by Hans Coper
Case 8 – St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child from
the workshop of Dieric Bouts the Elder
Case 9 – Nobel Prize Medal and Citation awarded to
Hans Krebs
Case 10 – Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap
by Pontormo
Case 11 – A Pair of Charles II Silver Andirons

Items where the licence application was
withdrawn following the case hearing
One application for an item found to meet the Waverley
criteria was withdrawn following the hearing and
consequently not referred to the Secretary of State:
Case 25 – Two paintings by Bernardo Bellotto:
The Fortress of Königstein from the North/South
Items found not to be national treasures
Three items were found not to meet any of the
Waverley criteria. They were:
Case 7 – A ‘builder’s’ ship model of RMS Mauretania
Case 23 – A marine ivory chess piece
Case 24 – Portrait of a Silversmith by Thomas de Keyser
National treasures referred to the Secretary
of State
Twenty-one cases were referred to the Secretary of
State for deferral and the Secretary of State accepted
the Committee’s recommendations on all of them.
The aggregate value of the 21 deferred items was
£117 million (£116,580,840).

Case 13 – Portrait of a Boy by Ferdinand Bol

Items where the licence application was withdrawn
following submission to the Secretary of State
Following submission to the Secretary of State four
further cases were withdrawn:

Case 14 – Arab Jambiya dagger and scabbard owned
by TE Lawrence

Case 4 – Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet by Rembrandt
Harmensz van Rijn

Case 15 – Arab robes owned by TE Lawrence

Case 13 – Portrait of a Boy by Ferdinand Bol

Case 16 – Femme, a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti

Case 15 – Arab robes owned by TE Lawrence

Case 17 – Nonsuch Palace from the South
by Joris Hoefnagel

Case 21 – A set of nine portraits of the Smythe Family
by Cornelius Ketel

Case 12 – A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid
ebony cabinets

Case 18 – Medieval King Robert the Bruce of Scotland
and Dunfermline Abbey Cokete Seal Matrix Pair
Case 19 – A drawing by Paolo Veronese,
Venice Triumphant
Case 20 – A pair of pietre dure table tops
Case 21 – A set of nine portraits of the Smythe Family
by Cornelius Ketel
Case 22 – An Italian pietre dure table top with the arms
of the Grimani Family
Case 25 – Two paintings by Bernardo Bellotto:
The Fortress of Königstein from the North/South

14 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Deferred items that were acquired
Of the 21 deferred items, the following nine
were acquired by institutions or individuals in the
United Kingdom:
Case 2 – Baird Phonovision disc and ephemera
Case 3 – An East View of the Great Cataract of Niagara
by Captain Thomas Davies
Case 5 – Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze strip brooch
Case 6 – Large bowl by Hans Coper
Case 8 – St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child from the
workshop of Dieric Bouts the Elder
Case 11 – A pair of Charles II Silver Andirons
Case 12 – A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid
ebony cabinets
Case 14 – Arab Jambiya dagger and scabbard owned
by TE Lawrence

National treasures that were not saved
Unfortunately, it was not possible to retain in
the UK every national treasure that was deferred.
Export licences were (or can be) issued for the
six items listed below:
Case 1 – Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château d’If
by Paul Cézanne
Case 9 – Nobel Prize Medal and Citation awarded to
Hans Krebs
Case 16 – Femme, a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti
Case 19 – Venice Triumphant, a drawing by
Paolo Veronese
Case 20 – A pair of pietre dure table tops
Case 22 – An Italian pietre dure table top with the arms
of the Grimani Family

Case 17 – Nonsuch Palace from the South by
Joris Hoefnagel

These have a collective value of £37.5 million
(£37,460,300), which represents 32 per cent of the total
value of objects placed under deferral and 29 per cent
of the total number placed under deferral.

These had a total value of £7 million (£7,000,513),
which represents six per cent of the total value of
objects that were deferred.

Addendum
Case 10 – Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap
by Pontormo

One further item in the process of being acquired at the
time of publication of the Statistical Release and another
item, where the deferral has been suspended to allow
further information, have not been included in the
tables published with the release or in the tables in this
report for the sake of consistency.

Before the end of the second deferral period the
National Gallery made a matching offer of £30,618,987
to the owner. At the time of publication this matching
offer has been rejected and the Secretary of State is
considering the owner’s response.

Case 10 – Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap by
Pontormo
Case 18 – Medieval King Robert the Bruce of Scotland
and Dunfermline Abbey Cokete Seal Matrix Pair

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 15

Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2015–16

Individual
export cases

Case 1

Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château
d’If, by Paul Cézanne
This painting by Paul Cézanne (1839–1906) is oil on
canvas, dates from circa 1883–85 and measures
73 by 59.7cm.
The applicant applied to export the painting to the USA.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£13,522,500, which represented the hammer price paid
at auction of £12,000,000, plus the buyer’s premium
of £1,522,500.
The Director of the National Gallery (assisted by the
Curator of Post-1800 Paintings, National Gallery), acting
as expert adviser, objected to the export of the painting
under the first and second Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was so closely connected with
our history and national life and it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that the painting was a rare and richly resolved
depiction of one of Cézanne’s master motifs, the Bay
of L’Estaque on the Mediterranean at Marseilles. In the
distance, on an island of solid rock erupting from the
sea was the Château d’lf. Cézanne painted at L’Estaque
from the 1870s but most importantly from 1883–85.
The landscapes he executed in the early 80s from high
vantage points overlooking the bay are among his
calmest and most magisterial evocations of the timeless,
sun-drenched Mediterranean. The motifs he found so
harmoniously conjoined there – blue sea, sky, clouds,
steep hillsides and protruding rocks, complicated
groupings of pitch-roofed peasant houses, and the odd
factory with tall chimneys – were deeply familiar to him
from his upbringing in Provence, but at the same time
gave him the visual stimuli to push his painting in new
directions. The present painting was a rare example of
a L’Estaque canvas executed in vertical format.

It was acquired in 1936 by Samuel Courtauld
(1876–1947) and descended in his family until its
sale in February 2015. Not only did Courtauld assemble
the greatest collection of impressionist and postimpressionist art formed in this country, he was also
instrumental in bringing such art to the attention of the
British public. He did this by providing funds, beginning
in 1923, for the National Gallery to acquire major works
of modern art. He was a co-founder of the worldfamous institute of art history that still bears his name
where modern art has long been a mainstay of the
curriculum and scholarly research. He donated the
major part of his private collection of modern art to
the Courtauld Gallery.
The list of distinguished dealers and collectors through
whose hands the painting passed before Courtauld
acquired it indicated the regard in which the canvas
was held. It was the last of twelve Cézanne canvases
Courtauld acquired. The painting became well known
to the British public, especially students, during the
29 years (1985–2014) it hung on long-term loan at
the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 17

The applicant had stated in a written submission that
it was arguable whether the retention of one extra
painting by Cézanne from Courtauld’s collection, when
there were so many Courtauld Cézannes on public
display in the UK already, would have a significant
benefit. Other motifs by the artist were generally
considered more important than Estaque within
Cézanne’s oeuvre; either by dint of rarity or date: Mont
Saint-Victoire, Joueurs de cartes, bathers, self-portraits
and still lifes – all of which were represented in UK
public collections. The condition of the work was less
than ideal as the canvas had been folded or rolled at
some point causing six creases that had been filled
and in-painted. Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château d’If
did not, in and of itself, add to our understanding and
scholarship of the history of modern art. Furthermore,
regarding the possible importance for the study of the
history of collecting, it was arguable that by the time
Samuel Courtauld acquired the painting in 1936, his
groundbreaking years of collecting and philanthropy
were behind him.

18 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

We heard this case in May 2015 when the painting was
shown to us. We found that it met the first, second and
third Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was so
closely connected with our history and national life, it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of Cézanne’s
painting and in particular his work in the 1880s.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of six months to allow an offer to purchase to
be made at the fair matching price of £13,522,500
plus VAT of £304,500. We further recommended that
if, by the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise funds
with a view to making an offer to purchase the painting,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the painting had been made and we were not
aware of any serious intention to raise funds. An export
licence was therefore issued.

Plate 1 Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château d’If, by Paul Cézanne

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 19

Case 2

Baird Phonovision disc
and ephemera
These materials relate to the first ever transmission of
transatlantic television pictures and were collected by
Mr Ben Clapp (1894–1990) between autumn 1927 and
February 1928 while employed at John Logie Baird’s
(1888–1946) company, Baird Television Limited.
Benjamin Clapp’s radio log books for his amateur radio
station GK2Z and related ephemera, are mostly A4 size
and smaller and almost entirely made of paper (fibre
product) whilst the Phonovision disc, which measures
277mm in diameter by 18mm in thickness and contains
an early video recording, is an ordinary 78 rpm shellac
(laminated) audio disc fabricated on 20 September 1927
by the Columbia Graphophone Company Limited.
The applicant applied to export the Phonovision disc
and ephemera to Denmark. The value shown on the
export licence application was £75,000, which
represented an agreed sale price of £78,750 (including
commission of £3,750).
The Associate Curator of the National Media Museum,
acting as expert adviser, objected to the export of the
Phonovision disc and ephemera under the first and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure from
the UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of the history
of national and international television and for our wider
understanding of 20th century communications.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that the archive under consideration related to the
first-ever transatlantic transmission of television pictures.
Between November 1926 and April 1927 John Logie
Baird and his assistant Benjamin Clapp developed the
idea of rigging up a receiving station and television
receiver in America and transmitting pictures over
telephone lines from Baird’s laboratories in London, to
Clapp’s house in Surrey (where there was a powerful
transmitter station), and from there, by wireless, to the
East Coast of the United States of America. The logbook
and ephemera cover the period of experiments from the
autumn of 1927 until February 1928 in the lead up to
the successful transatlantic transmission.

20 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

This material told us about television in its earliest
experimental stages, as well as revealing how it fitted
into the amateur radio culture and technology of the
period. The electromechanical system Baird and his
colleagues championed was simple and low-resolution,
but could travel long distances. The publicity generated
by the first transatlantic television transmission inspired
other companies to start or expand their television
efforts, both in Britain and abroad. There were no
similar documents or objects relating to the inaugural
transatlantic transmission other than these, and
although a number of Phonovision recordings were
made by Baird Television Limited from late 1927 to
mid-1928, only five of these survive. Furthermore, it
is the earliest Phonovision disc in existence, and thus
the world’s earliest surviving video recording.
The applicant had stated in a written submission that
the collection did not have a close connection with
our history and national life and that the nature of
the archive meant it was not really classifiable as
aesthetically important. The archive did not have
outstanding significance for study or learning as the
transmission of television pictures across the Atlantic
was a stunt rather than a technical breakthrough and
was initiated to keep the ‘Baird system’ in the news,
and hopefully also to elicit funding for future projects.
Wireless transmission of pictures had already been
accomplished by Herbert Ives of AT&T and his team
on 7 April 1927. Until the development of satellite
technology later in the 20th century, the transmission
of a signal via the ionosphere was never going to be
practical and was, in truth, a technological dead-end.
Furthermore, Baird had very little input except in the
final publicity stage and this was discernable in there
being no material, to the applicant’s knowledge, with
Baird’s autograph amongst the archive.
We heard this case in May 2015 when the Phonovision
disc and ephemera was shown to us. We found that it
met the first and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our history
and national life and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of the history of national and international
television and for our wider understanding of 20th
century communications.

Plate 2 Baird Phonovision disc and ephemera

We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of three months to allow an offer to purchase
to be made at the fair matching price of £78,750. We
further recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the Phonovision disc and
ephemera, the deferral period should be extended
by a further three months.

During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by the University of Glasgow
to raise funds to purchase the Phonovision disc and
ephemera. A decision on the export licence application
was deferred for a further three months. We were
subsequently informed that the Phonovision disc and
ephemera had been purchased by the University of
Glasgow with the help of a private benefactor.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 21

Case 3

An East View of the Great
Cataract of Niagara, by
Captain Thomas Davies
Watercolour and ink on laid paper by Thomas Davies
(1737–1812), measuring 34.3cm by 50.2cm dated 1762.
The applicant applied to export the watercolour to
Toronto, Canada. The value shown on the export
licence application was £151,800, which represented
the hammer price at auction of £120,000, plus the
buyer’s premium of £26,500, and VAT of £5,300.
The Lead Curator, Western Prints and Drawings,
British Library, acting as expert adviser, objected to the
export of the watercolour under the third Waverley
criterion, on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the history of military
draughtsmanship, exploration, and topographical
and documentary illustration.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that the work, executed in watercolour and ink on laid
paper, was an important early topographical view of
North America, and illuminated the history of British
exploration, science, and military enterprise. Dating from
1762, it was the earliest eyewitness representation of
the iconic landscape of Niagara Falls by a British military
surveyor. The view combined direct observation of
natural phenomena, the representation of native
figures, the first correct depiction of local geography,
and the earliest inclusion of Niagara’s ever-present
rainbow. Davies was highly regarded as a military artist
and collector, and was connected with a range of
influential scientific, artistic, and antiquarian figures. The
watercolour, and the career of Davies, was testament to
Britain’s global role in the 18th century. Scholarship in
the area of topographical art had evolved considerably
over the last few decades. Furthermore, this view’s
creator, subject matter, and dissemination (initially via a
print by Fougeron, 1763) all suggested rich avenues for
historical research.

22 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

The applicant disagreed that the watercolour met the
Waverley criteria. The subject of Niagara Falls was of
greater interest to North America, and specifically
Canada, than to the UK. The watercolour was of
historical interest as the artist was a British officer
serving in the Seven Years’ War, but not so closely
connected with our national history that its departure
would be a misfortune. The work was not of
outstanding aesthetic value as Davies was primarily a
topographical artist and concerned with conveying
information, in this case a survey of the land depicted.
The watercolour was one of over 50 similar views taken
by Davies in North America during the Seven Years’ War
and War of Independence. If these works could be seen
as of outstanding significance as a whole, as a valuable
eye witness record of the campaigns and landscapes,
this particular small work on its own could not claim to
be of outstanding significance for the study of some
particular branch of art, learning, or history.
We heard this case in July 2015 when the watercolour
was shown to us. We found that it met the first and
third Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was
so closely connected with our history and national
life and it was of outstanding for the study of the
history of military draughtsmanship, exploration,
and topographical and documentary illustration.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of three months to allow an offer to purchase
to be made at the fair matching price of £151,800
(including VAT). We further recommended that if,
by the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise funds
with a view to making an offer to purchase the
watercolour, the deferral period should be extended
by a further three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed of a
serious intention by the National Army Museum to raise
funds to purchase the watercolour. A decision on the
export licence application was deferred for a further
three months. We were subsequently informed that
the painting had been purchased by the National
Army Museum with help from the Art Fund.

Plate 3 An East View of the Great Cataract of Niagara, by Captain Thomas Davies

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 23

Plate 4 Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet, Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn

24 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 4

Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet,
Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn
This painting by Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn (1606–
1669) is oil on canvas and measures 126cm by 98.5cm.
It is inscribed and signed on the upper left of the
painting ‘Rembrandt f/1657.’
The applicant applied to export the painting to Asia.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£35,000,000, which represented an agreed sale price.
The Director of the Scottish National Gallery, acting as
expert adviser, objected to the export of the painting
under the first, second and third Waverley criteria on
the grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected with
our history and national life, it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of Rembrandt’s oeuvre.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that Rembrandt was the greatest artist of the Dutch
Golden Age and one of the most famous artists of all
time. The ‘fine Rembrandt’ Horace Walpole saw in 1752
in the collection of John Fane at Mereworth House
(Kent), was in all likelihood the portrait of Catrina
Hooghsaet, which meant it had been in Britain for more
than 250 years. The painting had been in the present
owner’s family since the 1860s. Frequently exhibited in
Britain since 1851, it was on long-term public display at
Penrhyn Castle (National Trust), at the National Museum
of Wales, Cardiff, and most recently at the Ashmolean
Museum. It had therefore been accessible to the public
for a long time and was probably the best-known
picture by Rembrandt in any private collection in the UK.
This portrait was one of the finest in the artist’s entire
oeuvre. It belonged to a small group of late threequarter-length portraits by Rembrandt and stands
out as the most refined of these. The only comparable
portraits in the UK were those of Jacob Trip and his
wife Margareta de Geer of about 1661 (National
Gallery, London), which were, however, executed in
Rembrandt’s ‘rough manner’ and were far less refined.

The portrait’s place in the history of and fashion for
collecting Rembrandt’s paintings in Britain marked its
significance for further research and learning. Its
complex genesis could be further explored through
additional technical research, enhancing our knowledge
of Rembrandt’s late working practice. The status of the
sitter also made this a unique portrait in Rembrandt’s
oeuvre (and beyond): she was a wealthy Amsterdam
Mennonite, married, but separated from her husband.
Her well-documented personal situation, in combination
with this unusual portrait, offered an extraordinary
insight into Dutch society at the time.
The applicant did not disagree that the painting was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and of outstanding
significance for scholarship under the second and third
Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in September 2015 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met the
third Waverley criterion on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune because
it was of outstanding significance for the study of
Rembrandt’s oeuvre and in particular his late works.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial period
of four months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £35,000,000 (plus VAT of
£660,000). We further recommended that if, by the
end of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser
had shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the painting, the deferral
period should be extended by a further eight months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
by the Art Fund of a serious intention to raise funds
to purchase the painting. Before the end of the
first deferral period the applicant withdrew their
application and the painting remains in the UK.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 25

Case 5

Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze strip
brooch
This gilded copper alloy lozenge-shaped brooch
decorated with unique foliate ornament measures
7.62cm by 4.45cm and dates from the late 8th century.
The applicant applied to export the brooch to the USA.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£8,300, which represented the agreed sale price of
$13,000 converted at the time of the application.
The Curator of Insular Early Medieval & Sutton Hoo
Collections at the British Museum, acting as expert
adviser, objected to the export of the brooch under
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune because
it was of outstanding significance for the study of
Anglo-Saxon art and material culture.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that this was the most elaborate example of a rare type
of Anglo-Saxon brooch to be discovered. Only fifteen
others with similarly sized plates and complex ornament
were known, but none matched its artistic skill and
creativity. Its free-flowing foliate decoration was
unparalleled in these brooches, which are typically
ornamented with geometric and zoomorphic motifs.
Its style was also unparalleled across Anglo-Saxon art
in general. The pointed leaf motif was familiar from
contemporary art but was executed in a unique way.
For these reasons, the brooch may have represented the
individual style of a particular workshop or craftsman;
a special commission by a wealthy patron; or even an
as-yet unknown stage in the development of AngloSaxon art.

26 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

The applicant disagreed that the brooch met the
Waverley criteria stating that the Waverley criteria
did not state that objects should be of outstanding
aesthetic importance for their age, rather their
aesthetics should be judged objectively. Furthermore,
this was a known brooch type, therefore its academic
benefit was limited to the art-historical study of stripbrooches, where it would be considered in the light
of its ‘unknown provenance.’ Just because something
may have been published in a corpus, or even that it
may have been unusual within the corpus, did not
make it outstandingly significant in a broad sense.
We heard this case in September 2015 when the
brooch was shown to us. We found that it met the third
Waverley criterion on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Anglo-Saxon
art and material culture. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should be
deferred for an initial period of three months to allow
an offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £8,460 (plus VAT of £1,692) which represented
the agreed sale price of $13,000 at the exchange rate
of £1 = $1.53 on the date of the hearing. We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial deferral
period, a potential purchaser had shown a serious
intention to raise funds with a view to making an offer
to purchase the brooch, the deferral period should be
extended by a further two months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed of
a serious intention by the Ashmolean Museum to raise
funds to purchase the brooch. A decision on the export
licence application was deferred for a further two
months. We were subsequently informed that the
brooch had been purchased by the Ashmolean
Museum with assistance from a private benefactor.

Plate 5 Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze strip brooch

AN2016.151 Lozenge-shaped brooch, late 8th century AD
Image © Ashmolean Museum, University of Oxford.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 27

Case 6

Large bowl by Hans Coper
This large bowl by Hans Coper (1920–1981) measures
37.5cm in diameter. It has an exterior of white porcelain
slip over manganese and the interior has sgraffito
decoration through manganese, overlayed with
white glaze. The bowl dates from circa 1955.
The applicant applied to export the bowl to Switzerland.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£89,800, which represented a hammer price of
£70,000 plus the buyer’s premium of £19,800.
The Senior Curator of Ceramics and Glass at the
Victoria and Albert Museum, acting as expert adviser,
objected to the export of the bowl under the second
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune because
it was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it
was of outstanding significance for the study of the
work of Hans Coper, as well as the wider history
of Studio Pottery.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that no other figurative shallow bowl by Coper
of comparable significance and aesthetic merit was
known to remain in the UK. It was a highly significant,
exceptional, and extremely rare work by Hans Coper,
arguably the most important and celebrated ceramic
artist of the 20th century. A work of outstanding
aesthetic importance in its own right, it was also of
exceptional significance to the study of the work of
Hans Coper, as well as the wider history of Studio
Pottery, which he had profound influence on during
the 1950s and 60s.
Coper was responsive both to the contemporary
world, but also to ancient sources, and frequently
drew inspiration from beyond ceramic traditions.
Actively interested in modern sculpture and painting,
he changed the agenda for studio ceramics, suggesting
new possibilities and priorities for the discipline; evolving
an entirely new visual language of pottery in which
ceramic forms assumed the characteristics of sculpture.
During the 1950s, Coper’s work underwent rapid
development. He worked through a number of different
forms and stylistic variations, and continually refined the
rather restricted range of materials and processes that
he habitually employed.

28 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

His work of the earlier 1950s consisted primarily of
pear-shaped jugs, tapering jars and vases, and shallow
bowls. Unlike his later works, which explored surface
qualities and textures in a manner akin to the patination
of sculpture, these works of the 50s were often
adorned with patterns and motifs. Frequently taking the
form of abstract linear designs, these nevertheless often
echoed the skeletal forms of bones or leaf structures
and also routinely included ‘eyes’. By 1953, such
decoration was on occasion becoming more strongly
figurative, with stylised, abstracted fishes and birds
being depicted. This large bowl of around 1955 is an
exceptional and celebrated example of this latter type.
The applicant disagreed that the bowl met the Waverley
criteria. This particular bowl had always remained in
private collections and it was not something that had
ever had any meaningful visibility amongst the public.
Therefore, any potential connection with the history and
national life of the UK had never been established. The
bowl was towards the larger end of its particular series
in terms of size. It was not unique in this regard and,
amongst collectors of Coper’s work, this had never
been the defining factor in determining value or
aesthetic achievement. There were many other
documented bowls produced in the mid-1950s with
similar abstracted pictorial designs which generally
featured birds or fish. There was a strong argument
that as Coper’s abstraction became more developed
and stylised later in his career his work became more
interesting and relevant to contemporary developments
in Modern Art. Furthermore, there were two other
series of bowls; the first featuring ‘Horse and Rider’
designs; the second featuring more sparsely decorated
linear designs. The bowl was strongly representative of
one element of Hans Coper’s output from a couple of
years in the mid-1950s. He quickly moved on to explore
the less pictorial, form-based style that he was more
closely associated with.

Plate 6 Large bowl by Hans Coper

We heard this case in September 2015 when the
bowl was shown to us. We found that it met the third
Waverley criterion on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Hans Coper
and studio pottery in the mid-20th century. We
recommended that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial period of
four months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £92,291.14 (including VAT)
which represented a hammer price of £70,000, the
buyer’s premium of £19,800 and an artist’s resale
royalty of £2,491.14. We further recommended that
if, by the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise funds
with a view to making an offer to purchase the bowl,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
four months.

During the initial deferral period, we were informed of
a serious intention by the Victoria and Albert Museum
to raise funds to purchase the bowl. A decision on
the export licence application was deferred for a
further four months. Although the expression of
interest came from the Secretary of State’s expert
adviser, confirmation was obtained at the time of the
objection and at the meeting, that the institution with
which they were connected was not making enquiries
with a view to purchasing or in the process of
purchasing the item. A decision on the export licence
application was deferred for a further four months.
We were subsequently informed that the bowl had
been purchased by the Victoria and Albert Museum.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 29

Case 7

A ‘builder’s’ ship model of
RMS Mauretania
This ship model is a full hull 1:64th scale ‘builder’s’
ship model of the RMS Mauretania measuring 390cm
in length by 43cm in depth and 106.5cm in height. It
dates from circa 1906 with four-bladed propellers being
added in 1909 and the original complement of lifeboats
increased after the Titanic disaster in 1912.
The applicant applied to export the ship model to
Germany. The value shown on the export licence
application was £500,000 (excluding VAT), which
represented an agreed sale price.
The Curator of Ship Model and Boat Collections,
Royal Museums Greenwich, acting as expert adviser,
objected to the export of the ship model under the
first, second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our history
and national life, it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance for
the study of the discipline of Naval Architecture and
more broadly in the study of UK maritime heritage.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that the full hull 1:64th scale ‘builder’s’ ship model of
the RMS Mauretania complete with a modern display
case was constructed from horizontal wooden boards
in ‘bread and butter fashion’ with laid wooden laminate
decks, the funnels and superstructure made from solid
blocks of wood. A large proportion of the deck and hull
fittings such as ventilation cowlings, winches and port
holes etc were made from brass and either gold plated
or had a brass and copper finish. The masts and
associated rigging were a mixture of metal, wood,
wire and natural cordage laid up to scale. All of the
glazing such as windows on the superstructure and
portholes on the hull were made from small pieces
of mirrored glass.

30 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

The model was made by a number of craftsmen in
the model workshop in the shipyard of Swan Hunter
& Wigram Richardson, Tyne and Wear and was one of
the original models either supplied by the builders for
Cunard, the owners of the ship or for the publicity
purposes of the shipyard. The model had been the
property of the shipyard since its construction circa
1906–12, right up to its sale in May 2015. It had been
on long-term loan to the Science Museum, London,
from 1938 to 2012 and had been on virtually permanent
display (excluding during WWII).
The applicant disagreed that the ship model met the
Waverley criteria, stating that a superior example of the
same model by the same maker was already held in the
National Collection at the Discovery Museum, Newcastle
upon Tyne.
We heard this case in October 2015 when the ship
model was shown to us. We found that the ship
model did not meet any of the Waverley criteria
and recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was issued.

Case 8

St Luke Drawing the Virgin and
Child from the workshop of Dieric
Bouts the Elder
This painting from the workshop of Dieric Bouts the
Elder (active by 1457–75) is oil on canvas, transferred
from panel in 1899, and measures 109.2 by 86.4cm.
The applicant applied to export the painting to Asia.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£3,300,000, which represented an agreed sale price.
The Director of the National Gallery, acting as expert
adviser, objected to the export of the painting under
the second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding aesthetic importance
and it was of outstanding significance for the study
of painting in the Netherlands around 1500.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that Dieric Bouts was one of the leading and
most influential Netherlandish painters of this period.
He was one of the first of his northern European
contemporaries to make use of single-point perspective;
these innovations were evident in St Luke Drawing the
Virgin and Child. Bouts’ work was also characteristic of
an important moment in Early Netherlandish painting
which showed a profound response to the Devotio
Moderna by creating a style of painting which sought
to collapse the psychological and physical distance
between the viewer and the fictive scene in order
to provoke a more powerful religious experience.
Bouts was probably born in Haarlem. He was
strongly influenced by Rogier van der Weyden as the
compositional dependency of the current work on
van der Weyden’s St Luke Drawing the Virgin (Boston
Museum of Fine Arts) shows. He was chiefly active in
Leuven where his two sons Dieric the Younger and
Aelbrecht also worked. The earliest dated work
attributed to the artist is the National Gallery’s
Portrait of a Man (1462).

This painting was of exceptional interest for two main
reasons: its connections with Dieric Bouts, and the
subject of St Luke drawing the Virgin that it depicted.
Both elements were extremely rare, particularly in the
context of UK collections, but it was their combination
in this work which rendered it an important, and indeed
unique, British cultural asset.
During the 15th century, Netherlandish pictures were
admired all over Europe for their visual sophistication,
imagination, and invention, and those by Dieric Bouts
and his workshop were no exception. St Luke Drawing
the Virgin and Child exhibits all of these characteristics.
The patterned tiles lead the viewer’s eye through the
composition, to the colonnade and landscape beyond.
The face of St Luke, which portrays both age and
character, displays the key characteristics associated
with Bouts’ portraiture. The expensive figured velvet
cloth of gold is exquisitely rendered, as is the tiled floor
and marble columns. The detailed landscape beyond
the colonnade, showing a walled town receding into
a mountainous horizon, demonstrates why Bouts is
viewed as one of the most important early
Netherlandish landscape painters.
The attribution of this panel had been the subject
of scholarly debate. Regardless of this uncertainty,
between 1900 and 1953 St Luke Drawing the Virgin
and Child was included in several seminal exhibitions on
early Netherlandish painting in the UK and abroad. The
work can, therefore, be viewed as fundamental to both
early 20th century and current art historical scholarship
on Netherlandish painting. Moreover, despite Dieric
Bouts’ artistic significance, a number of outstanding
questions remain to be answered concerning his oeuvre,
particularly who was active in his workshop and how it
was managed. The date of the painting would merit
further investigation, given that Bouts died in 1475 and
his son, Aelbrecht, ran the studio until his own death
in 1549.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 31

The applicant disagreed that the painting met the
Waverley criteria. The painting had been omitted from
all relevant exhibitions in the UK, and elsewhere, since
1953. In addition, there were other works in the
collection of the National Gallery, some firmly attributed
to the artist that are better known to scholars and the
wider public, and more closely connected with our
national life. Whilst the painting was certainly of
aesthetic merit, it cannot be considered of outstanding
aesthetic importance due to its deteriorated state
of preservation, its derivative composition, and the
quality of its execution. The composition was not
wholly independent, relying heavily on Rogier van der
Weyden’s treatment of the subject. Furthermore, the
execution and brushwork were not of the same high
quality as recognised, autographed works by Bouts
of which there were several examples in the
National Gallery.
Given the number of higher quality and better
preserved works by Bouts himself, his workshop and
other important Netherlandish painters in the National
Gallery and other UK collections, the applicant did not
believe, relative to them, that this painting was of
outstanding significance for the study of this particular
branch of art, learning or history. Unlike many
other works by the artist in UK public collections
St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child had not been
considered an original work by the artist since the
early 20th century.

32 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

We heard this case in October 2015 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met the
second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding aesthetic importance
and it was of outstanding significance for the study
of painting in the Netherlands around 1500. We
recommended that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial period of
three months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £3,300,000 (plus VAT of
£83,320). We further recommended that if, by the end
of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the painting, the deferral
period should be extended by a further four months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by The Bowes Museum to raise
funds to purchase the painting. A decision on the
export licence application was deferred for a further
four months. We were subsequently informed that the
painting had been purchased by The Bowes Museum
with assistance from the Heritage Lottery Fund and
the Art Fund through the Private Treaty Sale procedure.

Plate 7 St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child from the workshop of Dieric Bouts the Elder

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 33

Plate 8 Nobel Prize Medal and Diploma awarded to Hans Krebs

34 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 9

Nobel Prize Medal and Diploma
awarded to Hans Krebs
This Nobel Prize medal and diploma was awarded to
Hans Krebs in recognition of his discovery of the citric
acid cycle. The medal, measuring 66mm in diameter,
is in 23 carat gold and engraved along the lower left
edge ‘E. Lindberg 1902’, this being Erik Lindberg (1873–
1966), a sculptor, engraver and designer of the Nobel
Prize medals. The diploma consists of two vellum
membranes, the first membrane with a miniature
(205mm by 215mm) and the second with a vignette
(20mm by 220mm).
The applicant applied to export the medal and diploma
to the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £275,000, which represented the
hammer price at auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Co-Curator/Research, Harry’s Story, and the Modern
Collections Curator at the Museum of the History of
Science, University of Oxford, acting as expert advisers,
objected to the export of the medal and diploma under
the first and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our history
and national life and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of the history of science and biochemistry.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that the 1953 Nobel Prize medal and Citation awarded
to Hans Krebs for his discovery of the citric acid cycle
was closely connected with British history and national
life. Much if not all of the work on the discovery of the
citric acid cycle was conducted after Krebs came to
Britain in 1933, initially in Cambridge but for the most
part of his career at the University of Sheffield and
subsequently at the University of Oxford.
Krebs’s life in Britain and his scientific research here
were important in terms of the history and foundation
of biochemical and medical research, nationally and
internationally. While the Nobel Prize was awarded to
an individual, it was also, in part, recognition of the
important scientific research and community as well
as the body of expertise led and overseen by Krebs at
Sheffield up to the award of his Nobel Prize in 1953.
Furthermore, the scientific research conducted by
Krebs in Sheffield and later Oxford was part of a
larger narrative of the roles and significance of Jewish
refugees, who had fled Nazi Germany, in British life

from their arrival in the 1930s and beyond. It was also
worth noting that Krebs became a naturalised British
citizen through marriage in 1939 and that there was
a blue plaque dedicated to Krebs and his work on the
new Biochemistry Department building in Oxford.
The applicant disagreed that the medal and diploma
met the Waverley criteria. Krebs’s research was certainly
of great importance and the UK was fortunate as his
working archive was held by the University of Sheffield.
That archive provided a rich source for the study and
interpretation of Krebs’s research. The presence of the
medal and citation would add little to the archive that
could not be achieved by the display of a replica. In
addition, Krebs’s scientific discoveries pertained to all
multi-cellular living organisms, whether or not they were
currently resident in the United Kingdom, so any claim
that they had any particular relevance to Britain was
difficult to sustain. The applicant did not therefore
accept that the departure of the medal and diploma
from the UK would be a misfortune. The prize was a
fine piece of Swedish design, but it was not a unique
object. The quality of the design and craftsmanship was
of high but not outstanding aesthetic importance. There
was no disputing the outstanding importance of Krebs’s
scientific work, but the award shed no light on this.
We heard this case in November 2015 when the
medal was shown to us. We found that it met the first
Waverley criterion on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was so
closely connected with our history and national life. We
recommended that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial period of
three months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £275,000 (plus VAT of
£10,000). We further recommended that if, by the end
of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the medal, the deferral
period should be extended by a further two months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the medal and diploma had been made and
we were not aware of any serious intention to raise
funds. An export licence was, therefore, issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 35

Plate 9 Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap by Pontormo

36 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 10

Portrait of a Young Man in a Red
Cap by Pontormo
This painting by Jacopo Carrucci (known as Pontormo,
1494–1556/7), measuring 92.1cm by 73cm, is oil on
panel and was painted circa 1530.
The applicant applied to export the painting to the USA.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£30,618,987, which represented an agreed sale price
of £29,000,000 plus £1,618,987 commission which the
applicant later clarified was commission of $2,500,000
converted into GBP on the date of the application.
The Director of The National Gallery, acting as expert
adviser, objected to the export of the portrait under the
second Waverley criterion, on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune because
it was of outstanding aesthetic importance.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap was
a bravura piece of painting, executed in oils over bold
free-hand under drawing, some of which – particularly
in the head and hands – was now visible. Character and
ideals were conveyed through the composition, posture
and the handling of paint. The brushwork was fairly thin
but the carefully applied tonal layers were distinguished
by swooping, energetic strokes. The sitter was arranged
for maximum effect, his arms describing a circular
motion, at ease but poised. The grey of his puffy sleeves
contrasted with the black of his jerkin to strike a balance
between the sophisticatedly suave and the martially
virile. His posture accentuated further the tapering
shoulders and proportionately small head. The strong
accent of red provided by the cap emphasised the
alertness written across his face. All this was subtly
enhanced by the low point of view.

Born in the Tuscan village of Pontorm – hence his
nickname Pontormo – Jacopo Carucci spent his entire
career in Florence. He probably passed through the
studios of Leonardo da Vinci, Mariotto Albertinelli and
Piero di Cosimo, before assisting Andrea del Sarto in the
early 1510s, most notably on the decorative programme
at Santissima Annunziata, to which he made
autonomous contributions. He first entered Medici
employment in 1515 with fresco decorations at Santa
Maria Novella, a relationship that would continue for
the rest of his life. Pontormo ranked among the great
portraitists of the 16th century, working in an expressive
– or so-called ‘mannerist’ – style of portraiture that
integrates stylistic assertion and characterisation. Only
around fifteen portraits by Pontormo survive, most of
which are in Italy.
Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap can almost
certainly be identified with a picture mentioned by
Vasari in his Vita of Pontormo (1568) as depicting the
young patrician and citizen Carlo Neroni, painted ‘at the
time of the siege of Florence’ (1530–31). It is mentioned
in the same breath as a portrait of a Francesco Guardi,
another young patrician, which had been identified
with the Getty Portrait of a Halberdier which was
both stylistically and thematically comparable with
the portrait under discussion. The siege of Florence
by Imperial troops was both traumatic and bloody. The
fledgling Florentine Republic, formed at the expulsion
of the Medici in 1527, was allied to the French. The
siege was part of the wars of the Holy Roman Emperor,
Charles V, against Francis I of France and was sponsored
by the Pope, Clement VII Medici, who, under some
duress, had recently signed a treaty with Charles. The
Pope also backed the siege as he wanted to reclaim
Florence, the city of his birth, for his family.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 37

Neroni was born in 1511, making him 18 for most of
the period of the siege. That age is compatible with the
appearance of the youth in the portrait. In addition he
wears what is probably a wedding ring on the fourth
finger of his left hand. In 1530, the probable date of the
portrait, Neroni married Caterina di Giuliano Capponi, a
merchant banker’s daughter. In his right hand the young
man holds a letter, which is inscribed ‘Domi…’ (likely for
Domino or Domina(e)), i.e. ‘to Don’ or to ‘Donna’. He is
holding it close to his breast and appears to be sliding it
under his jerkin, which would indicate that the letter is
of a personal nature and it may indeed be a reference to
the marital alliance proposed first by National Gallery
curator Carol Plazzotta as the specific context for the
portrait’s commission.

38 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Neroni would later hold office under Duke Cosimo I, but
at the time of the siege he was a republican sympathiser
as was to be expected of a man whose great uncle,
Diotosalvi Neroni, together with his family, had been
exiled for republican leanings from Medici-run Florence
in the previous century. Neroni’s connection with
Pontormo was not restricted to this portrait, he also
commissioned from him a version of The Martyrdom
of the Ten Thousand. This could be the painting,
sometimes attributed to Pontormo’s pupil, Bronzino,
in the Uffizi. Pontormo’s treatment of the subject, also
known to us in a more elaborate version now in the
Gallerai Palatina, suggests an overt connection between
this early Christian story of sacrifice to the blood shed
during the siege. Further republican connections
between the Capponi and Neroni families are
demonstrated by the fact that Neroni’s father-in-law,
Giuliano Capponi, was an ardent supporter of the
‘Piagnoni’, the Savanarolan reform movement aligned
with the Republic, whilst his bride Caterina’s uncle,
Niccolo, served twice as ‘gonfaloniere’ of the Republic.
It is surely not a coincidence that Capponi who had
already commissioned Pontormo to decorate his family
chapel in Santa Felicita with unforgettable results should
have found it fitting that Pontormo should paint his
daughter’s future husband.

Beyond its martial context the portrait is a rousing
depiction of youthful idealism. Along with the
Halberdier it is one of the quintessential expressions of
Republican sentiment in Renaissance Florence, as well
as a first-rate example of Florentine portraiture of the
16th century.
The applicant disagreed that the painting met the
Waverley criteria. While outstanding, Portrait of a Young
Man in a Red Cap was not a unique work with regard
to British holdings of Italian Mannerist paintings. The
National Gallery already had four other paintings by
Pontormo of exceptionally good quality, all in excellent
condition. It also had a magnificent portrait by Bronzino
on loan from the Bingham Collection from the same
period as the current Pontormo, as well as several other
striking works by that artist. In addition it had a very
beautiful Portrait of a Young Man Holding a Letter by
Rosso Fiorentino from the same general era.
Additionally, the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool had a
magnificent Portrait of a Man with a Helmet by Rosso
Fiorentino, and the Royal Collection, Windsor, had the
striking Lady in Green (possibly a daughter of Matteo
Sofferoni) by Bronzino.
We heard this case in October 2015 when the painting
was shown to us. We found that it met the second
Waverley criterion on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance. We recommended
that the decision on the export licence application
should be deferred for an initial period of four months
to allow an offer to purchase to be made at the fair
matching price of £30,618,987 which represented the
private sale price of £29,000,000 plus £1,618,987
commission ($2,500,000 converted into GBP at the
date of the meeting at the rate 1.5441756581) as a
fair matching price.

We further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to making
an offer to purchase the painting, the deferral period
should be extended by a further six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period the National
Gallery, which acted as champion for the painting,
informed us that, having exhausted every other
possibility of purchase by another public body, it had
decided, with the support of the Government, that it
had an obligation to the national interest to try and raise
the funds itself to purchase the painting. Confirmation
was received from it that at the time it had objected
and at the Reviewing Committee meeting, the National
Gallery had not been considering a purchase of the
painting and a decision on the export licence application
was therefore deferred for a further six months. During
that time the Government offered a grant to the
National Gallery of £19,415,000 towards the acquisition,
this amount being the estimated value of the tax
collected or due to be collected by HM Revenue &
Customs on this painting. The grant was aligned with
the tax that would have been forgone if the painting
had been sold to the National Gallery, a Schedule 3
body, by the original owner through the private treaty
sale regime. This was a case where the foreign buyer
had chosen to pay up before the issue of the export
licence thereby precluding a net of tax acquisition by
the National Gallery or any other Schedule 3 body.
Before the end of the second deferral period the
National Gallery made a matching offer of £30,618,987
to the owner. At the time of publication this matching
offer has been rejected and the Secretary of State is
considering the owner’s response.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 39

Case 11

A Pair of Charles II Silver Andirons
This pair of silver Charles II andirons, measuring 50.8cm
in height, are formed of a double volute base supported
on lion’s paw feet. Each andiron supports a female
figure in contrapposto; one with an asp in her left hand
represents Cleopatra; the other with a sword in her
right hand, represents Lucretia. They are engraved with
the coat of arms of Edward Russell and his second wife
Margaret Russell who married in 1691. The andiron with
the figure of Cleopatra bears the London hallmark,
sterling mark and part of the maker’s mark on the
upper face of the stand and the base of the plinth
supporting the figure. The andiron with the figure of
Lucretia is marked on the upper support for the figure
with the date letter C for 1680 and on the underside
with the maker’s mark IM.
The applicant applied to export the andirons to the
USA. The value shown on the export licence application
was £541,000, which represented an agreed sale price.
The Deputy Keeper Sculpture, Metalwork, Ceramics and
Glass Department at the Victoria and Albert Museum,
acting as expert adviser, objected to the export of the
andirons under the second and third Waverley criteria
on the grounds that their departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because they were of outstanding
aesthetic importance and they were of outstanding
significance for the study of silver fireplace furniture
made in London in emulation of French style silver
furniture during the reign of Charles II.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that the andirons were in outstanding condition,
retaining their surface chasing. The representation
of female heroines from Roman history demonstrated
the importance of the classics in educating those in
authority and in providing a secular alternative to
sacred iconography. Dated and hallmarked in London
in 1680–1681, these figurative andirons demonstrated
the importance of fireplace furniture which highlighted
the hearth as a source of heat and light in the grandest
reception rooms, particularly best or state bedchambers
which formed the ceremonial focus of the monarch’s
own state apartments, or those furnished by leading
courtiers in their ‘Stately Homes’ in readiness to receive
the monarch.
Although the maker had been tentatively identified as
the London goldsmith John Moore, it was even more
probable that this was the mark of Jean Henri de Moor,
a native of Arnhem in Gelderland who worked in Paris
from 1674. He was recorded in London by 1678 as
40 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

‘Silversmith in Ordinary’ in the Lord Chamberlain’s list of
craftsmen and worked for Charles II in that year. During
1680 Jean Henri de Moor returned to Paris, where he
worked with his father-in-law François Lebret. From
1683 he was in Copenhagen and in 1687 he was given
a twelve year royal monopoly to manufacture furniture.
The pair of andirons under consideration were in
remarkable original condition bearing the coat of arms
of their owner Edward Russell, later 1st Earl of Orford.
They demonstrated the extent to which other surviving
figurative London-made silver andirons from the late
17th century had been altered. They provided a new
standard for assessing the quality and iconography of
silver fireplace furniture made in London in emulation
of French style silver furniture in the reign of Charles II.
Silver andirons were a short-lived fashion as the
introduction of coal as the preferred fuel in wealthy
houses in the early 18th century eliminated their need.
The applicant disagreed that the andirons met the
Waverley criteria. They were particularly good examples
of firedogs or andirons, but there were numerous other
examples in collections both private and public in the
United Kingdom.
We heard this case in November 2015 when the
andirons were shown to us. We found that they met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that their departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because they were of outstanding aesthetic importance
and they were of outstanding significance for the
study of decorative art, furnishing and patronage. We
recommended that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial period of
three months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £541,000 (plus VAT of
£108,200). We further recommended that if, by the end
of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the andirons, the deferral
period should be extended by a further three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed of
a serious intention by the National Museum Wales to
raise funds to purchase the andirons. A decision on the
export licence application was deferred for a further
three months. We were subsequently informed that the
andirons had been purchased by the National Museum
Wales with assistance from the National Heritage
Memorial Fund, the Art Fund, Goldsmiths’ Company,
the Silver Society and private donations.

Plate 10 A Pair of Charles II Silver Andirons

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 41

Plate 11 A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets

42 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 12

A pair of Italian pietre dure
mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets
This pair of ebony veneered cabinets of architectural
form, mounted with pietre dure panels and gilt metal
mounts and measuring 125cm by 93cm by 43.5cm
was made in Rome circa 1625. Each cabinet is on a
matching stand made in England circa 1800, veneered
in mahogany and with gilded caryatid supports and
ornaments, and measures 222cm by 92cm by 43.5cm
on the stand.
The applicant applied to export the cabinets to
Switzerland. The value shown on the export licence
application was £1,265,000, which represented the
hammer price at auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Curator, Furniture, Textiles and Fashion Department
at the Victoria and Albert Museum, acting as expert
adviser, objected to the export of the cabinets under
the second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that their departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because they were of outstanding aesthetic importance
and they were of outstanding significance for the study
of Roman pietre dure furniture.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that this pair of cabinets formed part of a small group of
outstandingly rich and accomplished Roman pietre dure
cabinets made circa 1580–1650. They represented the
best quality Roman cabinet making in the first half of
the 17th century. The combination of architectural form,
sculptural mounts and lavish hardstone panels was
exceptionally accomplished in this pair. Their original
commission could be plausibly related to the Borghese
family, influential in Rome under Camillo Borghese,
Pope Paul V (1605–21), because of the gilt-bronze
crowned eagles – a Borghese emblem – which
support the cabinets. Roman cabinets are rare in
British collections, and these were early Grand Tour
acquisitions by one of the leading collectors of the day,
the 4th Earl of Carlisle for Castle Howard, Yorkshire.
Their importance to the house was reflected in the
spectacular stands possibly designed by C.H. Tatham
circa 1800–02, probably for their new positions in the
new Picture and Sculpture Gallery.

The cabinets were of outstanding importance for
the study of Roman pietre dure furniture, given their
very high quality and association with the Borghese.
Whereas similar Florentine work produced in the Grand
Ducal workshops was well documented, Roman pietre
dure cabinets were not, raising the possibility that these
pieces may, with further research, be linked to the
names of particular craftsmen.
The applicant argued that the cabinets were not so
closely connected with our history and national life that
their departure would be a misfortune. However, they
did not dispute that both the second and third Waverley
criteria applied.
We heard this case in December 2015 when the
cabinets were shown to us. We found that the
cabinets met the second and third Waverley criteria
on the grounds that their departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because they were of outstanding
aesthetic importance and they were of outstanding
significance for the study of Roman pietre dure furniture
given their quality, the Borghese association and the
relationship of the cabinets with their stands and English
18th century collecting. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should be
deferred for an initial period of two months to allow
an offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £1,265,000 (plus VAT of £43,000). We
further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to making
an offer to purchase the cabinets, the deferral period
should be extended by a further four months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by the Fitzwilliam Museum to
raise funds to purchase the cabinets. A decision on the
export licence application was deferred for a further
four months. We were subsequently informed that
the cabinets had been purchased by the Fitzwilliam
Museum with assistance from the National Heritage
Memorial Fund and the Art Fund.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 43

Case 13

Portrait of a Boy by Ferdinand Bol
This painting is oil on canvas and measures 170cm
by 150cm. It is signed and dated on the lower left:
FBol.1652./ Ætatis. 8. Jaer.
The applicant applied to export the painting to
Switzerland. The value shown on the export licence
application was £5,189,000 which represented the
hammer price at auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Senior Curator (Northern European Art) at the
Scottish National Gallery, acting as expert adviser,
objected to the export of the painting under the second
Waverley criterion on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that this was Ferdinand Bol’s grandest child
portrait and perhaps his most remarkable portrait
painting. Exceptionally well preserved, it belonged to a
small group of child portraits from the 1650s. Uniquely
in his oeuvre, it combined a superb portrait with an
eye-catching still life of the highest quality. Little known
until it was sold in 2015 – only for the second time in
more than 200 years, the painting had been in Britain
since 1801 (or slightly earlier) when it was bought by
Frederick Howard, 5th Earl of Carlisle (1748–1825) and
displayed at Castle Howard since 1825.
Ferdinand Bol (1616–80) was one of Rembrandt’s most
talented pupils. Born in Dordrecht, he trained locally
with Jacob Geritsz Cuyp before joining Rembrandt’s
workshop in Amsterdam from about 1636 until 1641,
when he set up his own studio in the city. Bol was a
prolific painter and draughtsman of portraits as well
as of biblical, mythological and allegorical subjects.
He received prestigious commissions from the Dutch
Admiralty for the newly built Amsterdam Town Hall
(now Royal Palace), and from other public institutions.
Bol was a fashionable and highly successful portrait
painter from about 1650, when he developed his own
style of painting and emerged from the influence of his
master, Rembrandt. Portrait of a Boy was the most
refined of his six portraits of living children (he painted
one child on its deathbed). Unlike most child portraits,
especially of younger children, Portrait of a Boy places
the boy in an ‘adult’ setting (his left hand grasps a large
glass of white wine) and emphasises his ‘grown up’
status through the adult costume, pose and his
confident demeanour. The portrait was life size and may

44 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

have been hung over the chimney in the entrance hall
(voorhuis) of an Amsterdam town house on one of the
fashionable canals. The still life was placed on a table
covered with a rich Oriental carpet. His broad-brimmed
hat had been hung on the hidden finial of an X-frame
foldable chair, a type of chair traditionally indicative of
high status. These qualities in particular singled out
Bol’s Portrait of a Boy as perhaps the grandest of all his
portraits – he painted only one full-length single-figure
portrait of an adult sitter – and as one of the most
remarkable child portraits of the Dutch Golden Age.
In the past, the sitter had been identified as Bol’s son,
however, Bol married only in 1653, the year after the
picture was painted, and the couple’s first child was not
born until 1655. Full-length portraits of children on this
scale were rare in 17th century Holland. The sumptuous
costume and accessories such as the roemer-glass, the
silver plate, and the expensive Oriental carpet clearly
marked a child of particularly wealthy parents. The rarity
of the subject and opulence of the portrait combined
with its size, superb quality and condition made it
exceptional in Bol’s oeuvre and arguably his masterpiece.
The applicant disagreed that the painting met the first
Waverley criterion but did not contest that it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and of outstanding
significance for scholarship under the second and third
Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in December 2015 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met the
second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding aesthetic importance
and it was of outstanding significance for the study of
the work of Ferdinand Bol and of child portraiture in the
Dutch Golden Age. We recommended that the decision
on the export licence application should be deferred
for an initial period of three months to allow an offer
to purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £5,189,000 (plus VAT of £137,800). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial deferral
period, a potential purchaser had shown a serious
intention to raise funds with a view to making an
offer to purchase the painting, the deferral period
should be extended by a further five months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious expression of interest in raising funds
to purchase the painting. Before the end of the first
deferral period the applicant withdrew their application
and the painting remains in the UK.

Plate 12 Portrait of a Boy by Ferdinand Bol

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 45

Plate 13 Arab Jambiya dagger and scabbard owned by TE Lawrence

46 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 14

Arab Jambiya dagger and
scabbard owned by TE Lawrence
This steel Arab dagger from the late 19th/early 20th
century has a curved blade and gilded silver hilt and
scabbard which are ornately tooled and decorated with
wirework, pierced work and applied gilded elements.
The dagger and scabbard measure 30cm in length.
The applicant applied to export the dagger to
Switzerland. The value shown on the export licence
application was £122,500, which represented the
hammer price at auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Phyllis Bishop Curator for the Modern Middle East
at the British Museum, acting as expert adviser, objected
to the export of the dagger under the first and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure from
the UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of late 19th
and early 20th century jambiyas and for the study of
the biographical history of TE Lawrence as well as the
study of Britain’s role in Middle Eastern politics, past
and present.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that the jambiya was most likely produced in Mecca,
Saudi Arabia, in a style known in Arabic as ‘assib’.
Dating from the late 19th/early 20th century, and in
very good condition, it once belonged to TE Lawrence
(1888–1935), also known as Lawrence of Arabia. This
jambiya was presented to Lawrence by Sherif Nasir
(cousin of Emir Feisal I, who later became ruler of
Greater Syria and then Iraq) in 1917 after the victory at
Aqaba in Jordan. Four years later, on 9th February 1921,
Lawrence wore the jambiya with his Arab robes to sit
for sculptress Kathleen Scott. After his final sitting
he left his dagger and robes (Case 15) with Kathleen
so that she could continue her work and they had
remained in the Scott family possession ever since
(despite Lawrence requesting their return in 1922).
Lawrence had been depicted wearing the dagger in
several additional photographic portraits.

The historical significance of the jambiya lay in
Lawrence’s role in fostering relations between Britain
and the Levant from 1910 to 1930. Lawrence’s
multifaceted career – as classical scholar, archaeologist,
author, soldier and diplomat – began at Oxford
University. Whilst conducting an excavation on the
modern Syrian/Turkish border for the British Museum,
he provided crucial intelligence to the British authorities
on German interest in the area, and went on to survey
(with Leonard Woolley) southern Palestine under the
auspices of the Palestine Exploration Fund. Working at
the Arab Bureau in Cairo during the First World War
(under archaeologist and diplomat David Hogarth),
Lawrence’s expert knowledge of the region and culture
helped foster the Arab Revolt (1916–18) which aimed
to topple the ruling Ottoman Turks in the Levant and
create a single unified Arab state spanning from Syria
to Yemen. During this period, Lawrence worked closely
with numerous Arab leaders and would always be seen
in Arab dress.
Lawrence’s Seven Pillars of Wisdom and Lowell
Thomas’s biography gave Lawrence international fame.
This resulted in numerous portraits, photographs and
sculptures by leading artists like Augustus John, William
Rothenstein and Howard Coster. Some portraits were in
western or military attire, but a number were painted in
traditional Arab dress, for which Lawrence showcased
one of his three gifted jambiyas. Sherif Abdullah
(brother of Feisal and future ruler of the Transjordan)
presented Lawrence with his first silver-gilt dagger.
During the Arab Revolt, however, Lawrence gifted this
dagger to a Bedouin Howeitat chief, a diplomatic move
to help secure support from the Bedouin at the Battle
of Aqaba. After Aqaba was taken in July 1917, Nasir
presented Lawrence with a new silver-gilt dagger – the
one in question – connecting the gift to this key historic
moment. Lawrence found this dagger cumbersome for
everyday use and commissioned a smaller gold dagger
in Mecca (now at All Souls’ College, Oxford).

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 47

The applicant disagreed that the dagger met the
Waverley criteria. The dagger was not unique as TE
Lawrence owned three, all acquired between 1916
and 1918 during the Arab Revolt and functioning as
ceremonial accessories rather than useable weapons.
The first was now lost, but his most treasured dagger
– a small golden example made in Mecca, the
commission overseen by King Hussein himself – was
already in British institutional ownership at All Souls’
College, Oxford. Writing to Lionel Curtis on 22 February
1929, Lawrence described the dagger under
consideration: ‘I wore it for some weeks around Akaba
until Dagger II arrived from Mecca…[It] was a heavy
thing and I discarded it with pleasure for the gold one
which had been small by my order and the gold one I
wore for the rest of the war’. Whilst the dagger under
consideration was a ceremonial gift of Sherif Nasir and,
as such, its cultural importance – not least for the
Middle East region – should not be underestimated, all
evidence points to the fact that this was perhaps lost on
Lawrence himself. Many examples of Bedouin jambiya
daggers would have been produced during the period.
It was customary for men to carry such ceremonial
weapons at the waist, and to exchange them as gifts.
As such, the present dagger added nothing either to
the study of Arab daggers, or to the study of Lawrence.

Case 15

We heard this case in December 2015 when the
dagger was shown to us. We found that it met the first
Waverley criterion on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was so
closely connected with our history and national life. We
recommended that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial period of
two months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £122,500 (plus VAT of
£4,500). We further recommended that if, by the end
of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the dagger, the deferral
period should be extended by a further three months.

The expert adviser had provided a written submission
stating that the robes, which once belonged to TE
Lawrence (1888–1935), also known as Lawrence of
Arabia, dated to around 1916–19 and were in very good
condition aside from staining under the arms and on
the bottom front. The maker was unknown but they
were most likely produced in Mecca or Medina.

During the initial deferral period, we were informed of a
serious intention by the National Army Museum to raise
funds to purchase the dagger. A decision on the export
licence application was deferred for a further three
months. We were subsequently informed that the
dagger had been purchased by the National Army
Museum with assistance from the National Heritage
Memorial Fund.

48 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Arab robes owned by
TE Lawrence
These robes are made of off-white silk lined in white
cotton and embellished with crocheted silk buttons,
closures and trims. They comprise a long-sleeved
robe or coat (zebun) open at the front, measuring
103cm by 35cm, and a matching short waistcoat,
measuring 46cm by 32cm. The garments date from
around 1916–19.
The applicant applied to export the robes to Qatar.
The value shown on the export licence application
was £12,500, which represented the hammer price
at auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Phyllis Bishop Curator for the Modern Middle
East at the British Museum, acting as expert adviser,
objected to the export of the robes under the first
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that their
departure from the UK would be a misfortune because
they were so closely connected with our history and
national life and they were of outstanding significance
for the study of the biographical history of TE Lawrence
as well as the study of Britain’s role in Middle Eastern
politics, past and present.

It was uncertain when Lawrence purchased the
garments; they were possibly worn in 1916 to visit Emir
Feisal (third son of Sherif Hussein, to become ruler of
Greater Syria and then Iraq), when they were planning
the Arab Revolt. Lawrence appears to be wearing the
robes in the famous 1919 portrait by Augustus John.
Two years later on 9 February 1921, Lawrence wore
these robes together with a silver-gilt jambiya when
he sat for the sculptress Kathleen Scott. After his final
sitting he left his robes and dagger (Case 14) with
Kathleen so that she could continue her work and they
had remained in the Scott family possession ever since
(despite Lawrence requesting their return in 1922).

Plate 14 Arab robes owned by TE Lawrence

The historical significance of the robes lay in
Lawrence’s role in fostering relations between Britain
and the Levant between 1910 and 1930. Lawrence’s
multifaceted career – as classical scholar, archaeologist,
author, soldier and diplomat – began at Oxford
University. Whilst conducting an excavation on the
modern Syrian/Turkish border for the British Museum,
he provided crucial intelligence to the British authorities
on German interest in the area, and went on to survey
(with Leonard Woolley) southern Palestine under the
auspices of the Palestine Exploration Fund. Working at
the Arab Bureau in Cairo during the First World War
(under archaeologist and diplomat David Hogarth),
Lawrence’s expert knowledge of the region and culture
helped foster the Arab Revolt (1916–18) which aimed
to topple the ruling Ottoman Turks in the Levant and
create a single unified Arab state spanning from Syria
to Yemen. During this period, Lawrence worked closely
with numerous Arab leaders and would always be seen
in Arab dress.

We heard this case in December 2015 when the robes
were shown to us. We found that they met the first
Waverley criterion on the grounds that their departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because they were
so closely connected with our history and national life.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of two months to allow an offer to purchase to
be made at the fair matching price of £12,500 (plus VAT
of £500). We further recommended that if, by the end
of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the robes, the deferral
period should be extended by a further three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed of
multiple serious expressions of interest and offers to
purchase the robes. A decision on the export license
was deferred for a further three months. Before the end
of the second deferral period the applicant withdrew
their application and the robes remain in the UK.

Lawrence’s Seven Pillars of Wisdom and Lowell
Thomas’s biography gave Lawrence international fame.
This resulted in numerous portraits, photographs and
sculptures by leading artists like Augustus John, William
Rothenstein and Howard Coster. Some portraits were in
western or military attire, but a number were painted in
traditional Arab dress.
The applicant disagreed that the robes met the
Waverley criteria. Lawrence’s Arab dress had served
a purely practical purpose and that to elevate it too
highly as an artefact would likely run contrary to how
Lawrence himself would have felt about the clothing he
wore every day from 1916–18. There was little evidence
that Lawrence felt any deeper attachment to these
clothes: wearing the customary dress was simply the
easiest and most strategic option. Post-war, Lawrence
had no desire to wear, or indeed even to keep, his
robes. Although he retained a collection of Arab ‘kit’ (as
he described it in a 1922 letter to Kathleen Scott) as a
fancy dress box of sorts, a source of costumes in which
he could be portrayed as the dashing hero of Arabia by
the artists of the day, he had grown tired of this public
image. The robes under consideration added nothing to
the study of the textiles of the region/period, being of
average quality, and nothing to the study of Lawrence.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 49

Case 16

Femme, a sculpture by Alberto
Giacometti
This sculpture, measuring 37cm in height, is made of
plaster and dates from circa 1928–29.
The applicant applied to export the sculpture to Canada.
The value shown on the export licence application was
derived from a figure of $3,000,000, which, converted
to GBP on 15 September 2015, was equivalent to
£1,949,121.43. The sale price was recalculated at the
hearing as £2,083,500 based on the exchange rate
for the date when the case was heard,13 January 2016.
An application to export this sculpture had previously
been considered by the Committee on 15 January 2014.
On this occasion, the sculpture was found to meet the
first, second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our history
and national life, it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance for
the study of surrealism, the history of plaster sculpture,
Giacometti’s links with British Modernism and the wider
relationship between British and continental European
(particularly Parisian) Modernism in the 1930s. This
application was subsequently withdrawn and it had
been agreed with the applicant’s representative that the
application process for the export of this object be started
afresh with the same independent assessors and the
same expert adviser. The applicant therefore submitted
a new export licence application at a revised value.
The Chief Curator at the Scottish National Gallery of
Modern Art, acting as expert adviser, objected to the
export of the sculpture under the first, second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure from
the UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it was
of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of the works
of one of the greatest artists of the 20th century, the
study of surrealism, the history of plaster sculpture,
Giacometti’s links with British modernism and the wider
relationship between British and continental European
(particularly Parisian) modernism in the 1930s.
The expert adviser provided a submission stating that
Alberto Giacometti was a giant of the 20th century and
had had an immense influence on modern art in Britain.
Femme was probably the first work by him to enter a
British collection, having been purchased by Winifred
Nicholson in the mid-1930s. After Winifred’s divorce
from Ben, she spent time in Paris in the 1930s and met
50 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Giacometti, as well as Mondrian, Hélion, Brancusi, Arp
and other artists. She had the courage, and funds, to
buy Giacometti’s work, marking her as one of a small
number of British collectors and artists who were
captivated by the artist’s work at this time. Furthermore,
the direct link back to the 1930s when a number of
British artists became closely associated with the
modern movement in continental Europe, particularly
Paris, made Femme exceptionally rare and important.
Henry Moore, Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth
also travelled regularly to Paris in the mid-1930s and
knew Giacometti well. All three were heavily influenced
by his work, and the relationship between Femme and
Nicholson’s White Reliefs was self-evident. They were
also well acquainted with Winifred Nicholson, and
would have been familiar with the sculpture. During
this period, London was on a level footing with the
continent, before the war changed everything, and
Winifred Nicholson played a key part in the interface
between Parisian modernism and British artists.
However, much of the direct, physical evidence linking
British and continental modernism in the 1930s had
been lost, and almost nothing remained in Britain of
these various connections with Giacometti.
Giacometti moved to Paris in 1922 where he studied
sculpture under Bourdelle, Rodin’s chief assistant and
a great sculptor in his own right. By the late 1920s
he had shifted from Cubism more towards Surrealism.
Giacometti was by far the most important surrealist
sculptor. Referring to works from this period Giacometti
stated in 1933 ‘For some years I have only realised
sculptures that have appeared to me in my mind
in a finished state, I have reproduced them in three
dimensions without changing anything, without asking
myself what they mean.’ Femme exemplified this
approach which marked a leap from direct, visual
observation to an imagined, schematic approach. The
work was one of half a dozen flat, ‘plaque’ sculptures
which Giacometti made around 1928–29. There
appeared to be just two bronze casts of the sculpture,
although an edition of six was envisaged. The sculpture
was an outstanding work in terms of surrealism; it was
outstanding in terms of the work of one of the greatest
artists of the 20th century; and it was outstanding in
terms of its links with British modernism.
The applicant did not disagree that the sculpture met
the Waverley criteria.

Plate 15 Femme, a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti

Given the object was recently found to meet all three of
the Waverley criteria, it was agreed for the purposes of
the new hearing on 13 January 2016 that this would be
the Committee’s recommendation to the Secretary of
State. We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of three months to allow an offer to purchase to
be made at the fair matching price of £2,083,500. This
represented $3,000,000, converted on the day of the
meeting. We further recommended that if, by the end of
the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the sculpture, the deferral
period should be extended by a further four months.

During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention to raise funds to purchase the
sculpture. A decision on the export licence application
was deferred for a further four months. At the end of
the second deferral period, no offer to purchase the
sculpture had been made. An export licence was
therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 51

Plate 16 Nonsuch Palace from the South by Joris Hoefnagel

52 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 17

Nonsuch Palace from the South
by Joris Hoefnagel
This drawing is black chalk, pen and brown and black
ink, watercolour, heightened with white and gold, on
paper and measures 21.6cm by 32.5cm. It is signed
‘Joris Hoefnagle van Antwerpen.’ and inscribed
‘Palatium Regium In Anglie Regno quod appellatire
Nonciutz quasi nusqam simile. – Londini A.o 1568: 2’.
The applicant applied to export the drawing to the USA.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£1,000,000, which represented the price paid by the
owner through private treaty sale.
The Keeper of Prints and Drawings at the British
Museum, acting as expert adviser, objected to the
export of the drawing under the third Waverley criterion
on the grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of early watercolour painting
in England and English Renaissance architecture.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that Joris Hoefnagel’s view of Nonsuch, drawn during
his visit to England in 1568, was the earliest surviving
record of one of the most splendid Renaissance
buildings in Britain. Begun in 1538, this royal palace
melded French and Italianate influences into an
exuberant architectural synthesis, aiming to match the
splendours of Francis I’s new chateaux at Chambord
and Fontainebleau. The building expressed Henry VIII’s
perception of himself as a Renaissance prince and his
confidence in the new stability of the Tudor line, thanks
to the recent birth of his son, the future Edward VI.
Nonsuch was sold by Mary I to Lord Arundel in 1557
and returned to the possession of Elizabeth I in 1582
in payment of a debt. Thereafter it remained a royal
palace until 1670, when Charles II gave it to his mistress
Barbara Villiers, who began to dismantle parts of the
building in order to sell the materials to pay off her
gambling debts. By 1690 the building had all but
disappeared. No trace remains of this most remarkable
of English Renaissance buildings except in a few
archaeological fragments, the writing of the travellers
who admired it, and a few visual records.
There were only six surviving views of Nonsuch, and
the Hoefnagel watercolour was by far the earliest. It
was also one of the earliest surviving watercolours made
in England, half a century before the wash drawings
by Anthony van Dyck which were often cited as the
foundation of the national tradition. Its high finish and
the luxurious touches of gold may point to it having

been a presentation drawing, possibly given to Lord
Arundel who was the then owner of Nonsuch. Probably
largely drawn on the spot, it offered an unparalleled
and very detailed record of the decoration of the
palace’s elaborate South front which was decorated
with stucco panels. As a historical document, the
watercolour’s accuracy has been attested by the
excavation of stucco fragments bearing figures which
match the designs of panels shown here. It had
historical importance not only as the original drawing
from which Hoefnagel’s other views derive, but also
as a key source for understanding the hybrid nature
of English Renaissance architecture; all the more
valuable as the palace itself did not survive.
The applicant did not disagree that the work met
the Waverley criteria. The only mitigating factor was
the presence of another version of the drawing in
the Department of Prints and Drawings at the
British Museum.
We heard this case in January 2016 when the
watercolour was shown to us. We found that it met
the first, second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was so closely connected with
our history and national life, it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of early watercolour painting
in England and English Renaissance architecture. We
recommended that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial period of
three months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £1,000,000 (plus £200,000
VAT). We further recommended that if, by the end of
the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the drawing, the deferral
period should be extended by a further three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed of
a serious intention by the Victoria and Albert Museum
to raise funds to purchase the drawing. A decision on
the export licence application was deferred for a further
three months. We were subsequently informed that the
drawing had been purchased by the Victoria and Albert
Museum with assistance from the National Heritage
Memorial Fund and the Art Fund.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 53

Case 18

Medieval King Robert the Bruce of
Scotland and Dunfermline Abbey
Cokete Seal Matrix Pair
On 18 November 2015, we considered an application to
export a two-part copper alloy cokete seal matrix made
for the Abbey of Dunfermline possibly during the reign
of King Robert I ‘the Bruce’ of Scotland. The value
shown on the export licence application was £151,250
which represented the hammer price at auction plus the
buyer’s premium.
The Committee concluded that the seal matrices met
the first and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
their departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because they were so closely connected with our
history and national life and they were of outstanding
significance for the study of medieval history and seal
matrices. The Committee recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should be
deferred for an initial period of three months to allow
an offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £151,200 (including VAT). The Committee
further recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown a
serious intention to raise funds with a view to making
an offer to purchase the seal matrices, the deferral
period should be extended by a further three months.
The export deferral process for the seal matrices was
suspended to allow new information to be considered.
The case will be reported in full at a later date.

54 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Plate 17 Medieval King Robert the Bruce of Scotland and Dunfermline Abbey Cokete Seal Matrix Pair

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 55

Case 19

Venice Triumphant, a drawing by
Paolo Veronese
This oval drawing is black chalk, pen and brown ink,
brown wash, heightened with oil paint on varnished
paper. It measures 53.6cm by 36cm and is inscribed ‘P.
Veronese fec/ No. 36/ The Ceiling/ Senate’.
The applicant applied to export the drawing to the
USA. The value shown on the export licence application
was £15,400,000 which represented an agreed
sale price.
The Simon Sainsbury Keeper of Prints & Drawings at
the British Museum, acting as expert adviser, objected
to the export of the drawing under the second and
third Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Veronese’s
working methods.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that this was without doubt one of Veronese’s most
imposing drawings and the most important work on
paper by the artist to remain in Britain, in either public
or private collections. The drawing related to one of
Veronese’s most prestigious commissions: the
redecoration of the Palazzo Ducale after two disastrous
fires of 1574 and 1577, as part of a team that also
included Tintoretto and Palma Giovane. The finished
picture, completed around 1582, occupied one of three
large ceiling compartments in the Sala del Maggior
Consiglio, the room at the very heart of the Venetian
state process, where it was placed almost directly above
the dais which bore the Doge’s throne. This was one of
only three known surviving drawings for this important
commission. A much freer, more exploratory Study
of horsemen, a captive, a dog and a drum is in the
Kupferstichkabinett, Berlin and a Study of a cuirass
and armour is in the Louvre.

56 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

In the present drawing Veronese’s aim was not to
produce the kind of presentation modello that would be
submitted for approval to a patron, but rather to explore
the interplay of figures and architecture to judge the
final effect. This insight into Veronese’s working method
was another aspect of the drawing’s significance. The
artist had already made free sketches of various figures
for the composition, as could be seen in the Berlin
drawing. He had also presumably designed the
architectural structure for the drawing and this modello
seemed to be a first attempt to combine the two.
The applicant did not disagree that the drawing met the
Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in February 2016 when the
drawing was shown to us. We found that it met the
second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding aesthetic importance
and it was of outstanding significance for the study of
Veronese’s working method, and for its connection with
one of the most prestigious commissions of his career.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of three months to allow an offer to purchase
to be made at the fair matching price of £15,400,000
(plus VAT of £154,000 on the agent’s commission). We
further recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown a
serious intention to raise funds with a view to making
an offer to purchase the drawing, the deferral period
should be extended by a further six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the drawing had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 18 Venice Triumphant, a drawing by Paolo Veronese

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 57

Case 20

A pair of pietre dure table tops
This pair of pietre dure table tops each have a central
rectangular pietre dure panel with underpaint, one
depicting the Harbour of Livorno, the other an unusual
view of the Colosseum in Rome, surrounded by a
specimen marble border. They measure 74.9cm by
145.4cm by 5.7cm and date from circa 1785–86.
The applicant applied to export the table tops to
the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £1,500,000, which represented
an agreed sale price.
The Deputy Keeper Department of Sculpture,
Metalwork, Ceramics, and Glass at the Victoria and
Albert Museum, acting as expert adviser, objected to
the export of the table tops under the second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that their departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because they were
of outstanding aesthetic importance and they were of
outstanding significance for the study of 18th century
collecting.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that these commissioned artistic creations were based
on oil sketches painted by renowned artists for the
Opificio delle Pietre Dure, Florence (established 1588
by Ferdinando I de’Medici as a princely workshop),
with the colours of the specimen reference collection
of stones in mind. The artist’s intention was only fully
expressed in the pietre dure, which would have been
carefully assembled by specialist craftsmen. The present
examples were among the very best in this category,
and among the few known pietre dure landscape
scenes after Antonio Cioci (died 1792) who was the
designer of the Opificio at the time and introduced
still life and trompe l’oeil capricci in pietre dure.
Only the most distinguished and wealthy Grand Tourists
could afford such works. George, 3rd Earl Cowper
(1738–89) excelled as a patron of the arts from painting
to poetry and music, as well as supporting scientists, for
example, Alessandro Volta (1745–1827). Like many
other British noblemen of the time he went to Italy on
the Grand Tour, but unlike most of them he stayed
there and established himself in Florence. Earl Cowper
lived at Villa Palmieri until his death aged 51 in 1789.
As a collector he influenced art and taste in Florence as
well as in his native Britain. After his death his superb
paintings collection, including this pair of pietre dure
tables, was taken to Great Britain. His sons, the 4th and

58 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

5th Earl Cowper and subsequent generations, honoured
his collection, and gave it pride of place in their country
house, Panshanger, Hertfordshire. There, paintings and
table tops were displayed together in the picture gallery
until the mid-20th century when the estate was sold
and the house demolished.
The panels at the centre of each table show the interior
of the Colosseum in Rome and the famous Porto
Mediceo of Livorno, Tuscany. Livorno, known in English
as Leghorn, was a trade hub and the first point of
contact with Italy for many British Grand Tourists during
the 18th century. The Colosseum, as one of the most
important ancient Roman ruins, was a ‘must see’ for
every visitor to Rome and a frequently depicted ancient
site. Antonio Cioci’s representation of both landmarks
offers unusual, intimate views which include figures of
visitors. These reflect the Earl’s own travel experiences.
The juxtaposition of these two ancient and modern
subjects was unusual, and therefore a powerful
celebration of the Grand Tour as a journey of
contemporary exploration and marvel at the antique.
The table tops under consideration were perceived as
painting in stone rather than decorative arts, a fact that
was also highlighted by the 5th Earl’s decision to show
them in the Picture Gallery at his newly constructed
country house, Panshanger, alongside his father’s
collection of paintings; whereas the bulk of the
decorative arts were dispersed in Italy. As such they
illustrated an integral aspect of 18th century collecting
in Britain and were important for any study in the
history of collecting during this period. Their execution
from Cioci’s designs were of outstanding quality. The
later wooden stands and contemporary pietre dure
‘frame’ borders, added to the interest of the tables,
and provided evidence for the continued appreciation
of hardstone pictures over time.
The applicant stated in a written submission that
they did not believe that the tables were so closely
connected with our history and national life that their
departure would be a misfortune. As the table bases
were not the original bases, the tables were not as
aesthetically important. Their two-footed construction
also meant that the tables needed to be drilled into a
wall in order to display them. The pictorial scenes within
the geometrical borders were finely executed and both
were of a high quality. There was a good amount of
pietre dure material in the UK which allowed for the
study of pietre dure manufacturing and design, so they
did not believe that the tables’ departure would hinder

Plate 19 A pair of pietre dure table tops

any study of this branch of art, history or learning.
It could be considered, however, that the tables were
important for the study of British collecting in the
18th century.
We heard this case in February 2016 when the table
tops were shown to us. We found that they met the
first, second, and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that their departure would be a misfortune because
they were so closely connected with our history and
national life, they were of outstanding aesthetic
importance and they were of outstanding significance
for the study of pietre dure as an integral element in
the field of decorative arts, and for the study of 18th
century collecting. We recommended that the decision

on the export licence application should be deferred
for an initial period of three months to allow an offer
to purchase to be made at the fair matching price of
£1,500,000. We further recommended that if, by the
end of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser
had shown a serious intention to raise funds with a
view to making an offer to purchase the table tops,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
four months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the table tops had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds. An
export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 59

Case 21

A set of nine portraits of the
Smythe Family by Cornelius Ketel
This set of nine half-length portraits of Thomas
‘Customer’ Smythe and his family date from circa
1579–80. Eight of the portraits, each measuring
46.9cm by 38cm, are oil on panel and attributed to the
Netherlandish émigré artist Cornelis Ketel (1548–1616).
One is on canvas and appears to be a later copy of a
now lost original.
The applicant applied to export the portraits to the
USA. The value shown on the export licence application
was £350,000, which represented an agreed sale price.
The Chief Curator of the National Portrait Gallery,
acting as expert adviser, objected to the export of the
portraits under the first and third Waverley criteria on
the grounds that their departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because they were so closely connected
with our history and national life and they were of
outstanding significance for the study of the
development of portrait formats and the methods of
émigré artists active in England in the 16th century.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that this unique set appeared to be the earliest known
non-royal family group of portraits, eight of them by the
same artist’s studio and made to the same dimensions
with similar inscriptions. The Smythe set, therefore,
provided a singular opportunity to study the
development in English portraiture of the depiction
of family groups and children, and to compare this to
practices in the northern Netherlands where this genre
was more common.
The portraits were yet more significant because they
documented the family of a social group of growing
status and significance in 16th century London: the
mercantile elite. Merchants and trade officials had
increasingly close links with courtiers and the father of
this group, Thomas Smythe, played a significant role in
the development of English international trade. From
1558, for the next thirty years, he served as collector
of the customs (import/export subsidies) on all goods
(except wines) imported into London.

Painters from the Netherlands working in London from
the second half of the 16th century had a considerable
impact on British art. The set contextualised the
development of portrait formats and significantly added
to our understanding of the methods of émigré artists
active in England. The artistic handling of these portraits
was characteristic of the best work by Netherlandish
émigré artists. The portraits were consistent with the
work of one studio, and the attribution to Ketel
remained convincing. Eight of the portraits were painted
on wooden panel and were by Cornelius Ketel, while
the ninth – that of Thomas ‘Customer’ Smythe himself
– was painted on canvas and appeared to be an early
copy of a (presumably now-lost) original by Ketel. The
authorship of many portraits of this period was unclear,
so this group linked to Ketel was a valuable resource
for the history of British portraiture. The scope of this
commission (originally fourteen pictures) was extremely
ambitious and possibly represented the earliest example
in Britain of an extended group of individual family
portraits.
The applicant stated in a written submission that they
did not consider that the portraits met the first and
second Waverley criteria. Whilst they accepted that the
portraits might meet the third criterion they considered
the intended destination of the portraits to be the
most relevant location for the study and interpretation
of the portraits.
We heard this case in November 2015 when the
portraits were shown to us. We found that they met
the first and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
their departure would be a misfortune because they
were so closely connected with our history and national
life and they were of outstanding significance for the
study of the development of portrait formats and the
methods of émigré artists active in England in the 16th
century. We recommended that the decision on the
export licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price of
£350,000. We further recommended that if, by the end
of the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the portraits, the deferral
period should be extended by a further three months.
Before the end of the first deferral period the applicant
withdrew their application. We were subsequently
informed that the portraits had been purchased by The
Skinners’ Company and the portraits remain in the UK.

60 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Plate 20 A set of nine portraits of the Smythe Family by Cornelius Ketel

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 61

Plate 21 An Italian pietre dure table top with the arms of the Grimani Family

62 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 22

An Italian pietre dure table top
with the arms of the Grimani
Family
This rectangular Italian pietre dure table top, measuring
6cm by 150cm by 111.5cm, is inlaid with the arms the
Grimani family and was probably made in Florence at
the Grand Ducal workshops circa 1600–20. The top
rests on an English Elizabethan/Louis XIV revival style
base, measuring 70.5cm by 142cm by 103cm, made
between 1830 and 1847 of gilded wood with a
fluted frieze on four gadrooned and tapering legs
incorporating strap work.
The applicant applied to export the table top to the USA.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£3,610,800, which represented the hammer price at
auction plus VAT on the buyers premium of £101,800.
The Curator of Furniture, Textiles, and Fashion
Department at the Victoria and Albert Museum, acting
as expert adviser, objected to the export of the table
top under the second and third Waverley criteria on
the grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance for
the study of Italian, early 17th century pietre dure.

The expert adviser stated that the rectangular pietre
dure table top, inlaid with the arms of the Grimani
family, was probably made in Florence at the Grand
Ducal workshops c.1600–20 and was possibly given to
or commissioned by Patriarch Antonio Grimani (1554–
1625). No evidence, however, had yet been found to
prove its origins in Florence and there were no directly
comparable pietre dure table tops. Renaissance
hardstone inlay appeared c.1550 in Rome, inspired by
ancient Roman opus sectile. Table slabs with inventive
variations on geometric patterns designed by eminent
architects were made using excavated stones. Although
a large number continued to be made into the early
decades of the 17th century these were unique luxury
items for conspicuous display, and were provided with
impressive carved stands and protective covers. Similar
hardstone tables were being made in Florence before
1560 and in 1588 Grand Duke Ferdinand I de’ Medici
(r.1587–1609) reorganised the production of disparate
workshops at the Galleria dei Lavori (with the
involvement of Milanese stone cutters), from which
emerged pietre dure panels characterised by ‘mirror-like’
luminosity and limitless colour range. Such tables
(square, rectangular and octagonal) were given as
diplomatic gifts and prized by the nobility all over
Europe, including England where hardstone tables
were owned by Queen Elizabeth I, the 1st and 2nd
Lords Burghley, the 1st Earl of Salisbury, the 21st Earl
of Arundel and the 1st Duke of Buckingham. The
finest were distinguished by their size, the range and
precision-cutting of stones, the complexity of their
designs and by the inclusion of the owner’s heraldry.
During the 18th and 19th centuries British Grand Tourist
collectors such as Henry Greville, 3rd Earl of Warwick,
the purchaser in Venice of this table, and the 4th Earl
of Carlisle energetically acquired Italian pietre dure
furniture and panels (principally in Florence and Rome)
as trophies for the state rooms of their houses. From the
1790s the flow of acquisitions of pietre dure by British
collectors had been described as a ‘flood’.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 63

The table top was of extremely high quality, had
great beauty and was of exceptionally complex and
accomplished design. It was executed in a wide variety
of particularly bold and unusual hardstones, notably the
blue lapis lazuli, the orange, yellows and greens of the
agates and jaspers, especially those from Sicily. Another
particular aspect of its rarity was the inclusion of
prominent familial heraldry and symbols with cartouches,
vases and flowers of strongly coloured stones against
a ground of large-scale strapwork and a large central
panel of matched abstract stones. It was also the only
example in the UK belonging to a small group of early
17th century, specially-commissioned armorial tables,
which were associated with identifiable individuals or
families, notably those in the Prado, Madrid, and the
Residenz, Munich.
The applicant stated in a written submission that they
did not contest that this table top met the second and
third Waverley criteria, being of outstanding aesthetic
importance and of outstanding significance for
scholarship. They did not, however, believe that the
first Waverley criterion applied. The table top, made in
the first quarter of the 17th century and immediately
positioned in the grand Venetian palazzo, did not arrive
in England until the second quarter of the 19th century.
It was made by Italian craftsmen for an Italian family
and only came to Britain as the spoils of a late Grand
Tour. There is no dispute that this was one of the
finest examples of pietre dure but they did not feel
that its connection to British life was so strong that its
departure from the UK would have been a misfortune.

64 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

We heard this case in April 2016 when the table top
was shown to us. We found that it met the second and
third Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Italian, early
17th century pietre dure. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should be
deferred for an initial period of three months to allow
an offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £3,509,000 (plus £710,800 VAT). The reason
for the difference in the amount of VAT on the export
licence application and the amount recommended by
the Committee is that in the event the table top was
re-sold in the UK VAT would be payable on the full
amount rather than just on the buyer’s premium. We
further recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown a
serious intention to raise funds with a view to making
an offer to purchase the table top, the deferral period
should be extended by a further five months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the table top had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds. An
export licence was, therefore, issued.

Case 23

A marine ivory chess piece
This chess piece in the form of a knight riding a horned
monster, measuring 8cm in height, is made of walrus
ivory and dates from 1400.
The applicant applied to export the chess piece to the
USA. The value shown on the export licence application
was £173,000, which represented the hammer price at
auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Curator of Late Medieval Collections at the British
Museum, acting as expert adviser, objected to the
export of the chess piece under the third Waverley
criterion on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the history of chess and the
history of medieval art.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that this particular ivory chess piece was of a unique
type, which had remained unknown until it was sold in
2015. The iconography of a knight riding a monster had
no parallel, making the piece an incredibly rare example,
and associated with a very small group of pieces
associated with Scandinavia, Denmark and North
Germany from the 13th–15th centuries. Medieval chess
pieces appeared infrequently on the art market and
seldom in such good condition.
The unique iconography of the chess piece,
incorporating a knight, foot soldiers and a monster,
connected this object with depictions of the fantastical
in medieval material culture, including bestiaries in
manuscripts, late 15th and early 16th century prints
and metalwork in the form of aquamanilia. Chess was
a game favoured by the elite in medieval society and
was associated with skill and intelligence in addition to
courtly romance and chivalry. This chess piece formed
a part of that elite social and artistic context.

The piece was a unique carving which had no exact
parallels and could be associated with a very narrow
selection of chess pieces. Such a rare and unstudied
object, carved in a playful and commanding manner,
was one of the finest gaming pieces from the 15th
century, which was made more impressive by
its condition.
The applicant disagreed that the chess piece met
the Waverley criteria. The piece was not English and
had no significant UK provenance. Ivory chess pieces
representing mounted kings, queens, bishops, and
knights flanked by an assembly of soldiers, pages, or
courtiers were relatively common in the 14th and 15th
centuries. Whilst comical and inventive, the design of
the present chess piece was essentially a simplified
version of other examples. There were many alternatives
available for study in the UK already, and a large
amount of scholarship already existed on the subject.
The incorporation of a monster and a jester on this
Knight might be unique, however, many of the chess
pieces included such idiosyncrasies. It was less likely that
these elements carried specific meaning than that they
were all carved with a variation of secular motifs so that
the pieces could function as conversation pieces during
the game.
We heard this case in April 2016 when the chess piece
was shown to us. We found that the chess piece did not
meet any of the Waverley criteria and recommended
that an export licence be issued. An export licence
was issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 65

Case 24

Portrait of a Silversmith
by Thomas de Keyser
This portrait is oil on oak panel measuring 63.7cm by
53.5cm. It is signed with a monogram and dated centre
left (on a drawing on the table): ‘TDK 1630’.
The applicant applied to export the portrait to France.
The value shown on the export licence application was
£452,400, which represented the hammer price at
auction plus the buyer’s premium.
The Director of the National Gallery, acting as expert
adviser, objected to the export of the portrait under the
second and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune as it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of the social
status of artists and craftsmen in the early modern era.
The expert adviser provided a written submission stating
that Thomas de Keyser’s Portrait of a Silversmith was a
commanding and well-preserved example of the work
of one of the leading portrait painters in Amsterdam in
the second quarter of the seventeenth century. De
Keyser’s unique contribution to the history of Dutch
portrait painting, typically full-length, small-scale
portraits of sitters in a domestic environment, vividly
captured the ideals and aspirations of Amsterdam’s
burgeoning and increasingly prosperous middle class
of merchants, civic officials, and elite craftsmen. About
100 paintings by de Keyser were known, of which
only a few featured in UK collections.
Portrait of a Silversmith was an especially beautiful
example of Thomas de Keyser’s smallscale full-length
portraits, which in the 1620s and 1630s revolutionised
portraiture in Amsterdam by introducing a sense of
intimacy and lively personality to a traditionally rather
staid and formal genre. The exceptional state of
preservation of Portrait of a Silversmith showcased de
Keyser’s crisp and refined technique, his attention to
detail and his sensitivity to nuances of colour and
texture – all designed to heighten our awareness of
the sitter’s elegant demeanour and the specific costly
objects gathered around him.

66 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

De Keyser’s innovative portraits express the aspirations
of a vigorous urban society that helped transform the
nascent Dutch Republic into a world power. Many of his
portraits, including the present work, depict members
of the upper middle class, who placed great import on
gentlemanly ideals of informal grace while also showing
pride in their chosen professions. De Keyser’s virtuoso
technique communicated pride in his own abilities as
well, as he crafts a meticulously detailed image of a
silversmith – one of the most highly regarded trades in
17th century Amsterdam – that was also a sophisticated
statement of professional ideals.
The applicant disagreed that the portrait met the
Waverley criteria. The portrait was by a Dutch artist,
who was born and died in Amsterdam. The identity
of the sitter, who was evidently a silversmith, was not
certain but there was no suggestion that he was English
and he was almost certainly Dutch. During its time in
England the portrait remained a little-known work and
was, to our knowledge, seen only once by the general
public in a non-commercial exhibition: at the Royal
Academy in London in 1952–53. It was certainly a good
example of the small, full-length portrait favoured by
Thomas Keyser in the late 1620s and early 1630s that
introduced more informality into the more static fulllengths of earlier artists such as Pickenoy and Mierevelt,
but it could not in itself be considered to be of
outstanding aesthetic importance. In the context of
Dutch Golden Age portraiture, whilst it was a good
example of what was most sought after in the years
immediately before the emergence of Rembrandt in
the 1630s, it lacked the psychological insight of works
by the great portraitists of 17th century Holland.
Furthermore, the portrait shed no new light on
the artist.
We heard this case in January 2016 when the portrait
was shown to us. We found that the portrait did not
meet any of the Waverley criteria and recommended
that an export licence be issued. An export licence
was issued.

Case 25

Two paintings by Bernardo
Bellotto: The Fortress of
Königstein from the North/South
On 17 June 2015, we considered an application to
export two paintings by Bernardo Bellotto, The Fortress
of Königstein from the North and The Fortress of
Königstein from the South. We concluded that the
paintings satisfied both the second and third Waverley
criteria. The application for an export licence was
subsequently withdrawn. Consequently, no decision
on the application has been made by the Secretary
of State.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 67

Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2015–16

Appendices

68 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Appendix A
Report on additional funding
for acquisitions
UK public institutions, regrettably, have very
limited acquisition funds. We are extremely grateful,
as always, for the external funding provided towards
purchasing items placed under deferral as a result of
recommendations we have made. The money provided
by the main funding bodies for all acquisitions of cultural
objects are listed below, and the tables in Appendix H
give specific details of the funding received for exportdeferred items.

Year

National
Heritage
Memorial Fund
(£ millions)

Heritage
Lottery Fund
(museums/galleries)
(£ millions)

Heritage
Lottery Fund
(manuscripts/
archives)
(£ millions)

Total
(£ millions)

Total adjusted
for inflation
as per 2015
(£ millions)
approximate*

2006–07

6.4

2.1

1.2

9.7

12.66

2007–08

9.4

1.1

1.6

12.1

15.14

2008–09

13.79

1.12

0.32

15.23

18.32

2009–10

4.01

0.36

0.04

4.41

5.33

2010–11

12.34

0.69

0.26

13.29

15.37

2011–12

4.99

6.04

0.11

11.14

12.24

2012–13

4.69

10.48

0.7

15.87

16.90

2013–14

6.54

16.31

0.019

22.87

23.64

2014–15

5.30

7.64

1.62

12.94

12.94

2015–16

4.62

5.42

0.12

10.04

10.04

*

	Figures based on the Bank of England Inflation Calculator for illustrative purposes only: www.bankofengland.co.uk/education/inflation/
calculator/index1.htm

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 69

National Heritage Memorial Fund and Heritage Lottery Fund spend on acquisitions 2006–07 to 2015–16

25

Pounds (millions)

20

15

10

5

0
06/07

07/08

08/09

09/10

10/11

11/12

12/13

13/14

14/15

15/16

Year
National Heritage Memorial Fund
Heritage Lottery Fund (manuscripts/archives)

i) The National Heritage Memorial Fund
The National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF) set up
under the National Heritage Act 1980 in memory of the
people who gave their lives for the UK, acts as a fund
of last resort to provide financial assistance towards the
acquisition, preservation and maintenance of land,
buildings, works of art and other objects which are of
outstanding importance to the national heritage and
are under threat. The NHMF’s grant-in-aid since 2010–11
has been £5 million per annum and, where necessary,
it can use its endowment fund for exceptional cases.
The NHMF was asked to support four items that
were export deferred following advice from the
Reviewing Committee for the Export of Works of Art.
The National Museum of Wales acquired a pair of
Charles II Silver Andirons which were used for burning
logs in open fireplaces and demonstrate the importance
of fireplace furniture during that period. A pair of 17th
century Roman pietre dure mounted cabinets, part
of the private collection at Castle Howard since their
purchase by Henry Howard, were acquired by the
70 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Heritage Lottery Fund (museums/galleries)
Total

Fitzwilliam Museum. The Arab Jambiya dagger owned
by TE Lawrence, more commonly known as Lawrence
of Arabia, was acquired by the National Army Museum.
Finally the Victoria and Albert Museum was successful
in acquiring Nonsuch Palace from the South by
Joris Hoefnagel.
Away from export-deferred items, this year the NHMF
funded a significant number of archives and literary
heritage. We supported the acquisition of manuscripts,
letters and drawings by the poet Ted Hughes, amassed
by his close friend Roy Davids, which were acquired by
Pembroke College, Cambridge. The University of Bristol
added the Oliver Messel personal archive to its extensive
theatre collection and the Royal Asiatic Society acquired
the Thomas Manning papers. Manning was an early
British sinologist and the archive charts his attempts
to visit China, his trip to Tibet and studies of Chinese
language and culture.

Other literary-related heritage saved for the nation
includes an early manuscript copy of one of John
Donne’s most famous poems Good Friday Riding
Westward and the Bronte family’s copy of The Remains
of Henry Kirke White by Robert Southey which originally
belonged to the Brontes’ mother, Maria Bronte. The
book, acquired by the Bronte Society, includes numerous
annotations and sketches by members of the Bronte
family as well as two unpublished fragments of writing
by Charlotte Bronte.
Artworks have also featured in our acquisitions this year
including Two Forms (Orkney) 1967 by Dame Barbara
Hepworth for the Pier Arts Centre in Stromness, Orkney
and an album of photographs by Gertrude Jekyll for
the Garden Museum in south London.
ii) The Heritage Lottery Fund
The Heritage Lottery Fund is the largest funder of the
UK’s heritage, with a current projection of circa £400
million a year to distribute. As in previous years there
has been a spread of acquisitions of portable heritage
from archives, fine art/sculpture through to archaeology.
The Heritage Lottery Fund has supported two items that
were temporarily stopped from export out of the UK
following advice from the Reviewing Committee for the
Export of Works of Art. The Bowes Museum acquired
the St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child by Dieric
Bouts following the Art Fund stepping in as a Schedule 3
body to assist in its acquisition. The National Army
Museums acquired An East View of the Great Cataract
of Niagara by Captain Thomas Davies.
Our largest award was to the Tate to acquire William
Stott’s Le Passeur (circa 1882) which it acquired by
Private Treaty sale. The work will be shared through a
bespoke arrangement in Oldham, Aberdeen and
Southampton along with a skills and capacity building
programme to support museums in securing loans from
national collections. The Victoria and Albert Museum
acquired the personal papers of theatre, opera and film
director Peter Brook containing correspondence with
key theatrical and cultural figures as well as diaries,
reflections and planning documents for key films
and plays.

We continued to support acquisitions in regional and
local museums and archives. Colchester and Ipswich
Museums acquired the Rendlesham Collection which
resulted from a major archaeological research project
in Suffolk. The remarkable finds represent an impressive
body of evidence for a rich and important settlement
with skilled metalworkers. Warwickshire County Record
Office acquired the Warwick Healey Motor company
archive. The company was established in Warwick in
1945 and the archive was offered for purchase by the
granddaughters of the founder, Donald Healey.
Details of awards for the acquisition of export-deferred
items are in Appendix H (page 86).
iii) The Art Fund
The Art Fund is the national fundraising charity for art,
helping to increase the range and quality of art in public
collections across the UK. In 2015–16, the Art Fund
contributed towards the acquisition of five items placed
under temporary deferral. These were An East View
of the Great Cataract of Niagara by Captain Thomas
Davies, St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child from the
workshop of Dieric Bouts the Elder, a Pair of Charles II
Silver Andirons, A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted,
inlaid ebony cabinets and Nonsuch Palace from the
South by Joris Hoefnagel. Details are in Appendix H.
iv) The ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
The ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund assists the
collections of non-national museums, galleries, specialist
libraries and record offices in England and Wales. The
fund was not asked to support with any export-deferred
items in the reporting year.
v) The National Fund for Acquisitions
The National Fund for Acquisitions (NFA), provided by
the Scottish Government to the Trustees of National
Museums Scotland, contributes towards the acquisition
of objects for the collections of non-national museums,
galleries, libraries and archives in Scotland. In 2015–16,
the NFA made 67 payments totalling £156,175,
enabling 27 organisations to make acquisitions costing
£1.07 million. As of 31 March 2016, a further 13 awards
totalling £47,630 had been committed but not yet paid.
The fund was not asked to support any export-deferred
items in the reporting year.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 71

vii) Acceptance in Lieu and the Cultural
Gifts Scheme
Acceptance in Lieu enables UK taxpayers to transfer
important works of art and other important heritage
objects into public ownership while paying Inheritance
Tax, or one of its earlier forms. The taxpayer is given the
full open-market value of the item.
The Cultural Gifts Scheme opened in early 2013 and
enables UK taxpayers to donate important works of
art and heritage objects to the nation during their
lifetime. Donors receive a tax reduction based on a set
percentage of the value of the object they are donating
– this is 30 per cent where the donor is an individual
and 20 per cent where the donor is a company.
In 2015–16, 36 Acceptance in Lieu and Cultural Gifts
Scheme cases were completed, resulting in almost
£50 million-worth of important cultural property being
secured for the nation. Details are in the Acceptance in
Lieu and Cultural Gifts Scheme 2015–16 Annual Report,
available on the Arts Council’s website.
viii) Private treaty sales
If a heritage object is sold on the open market, the
vendor may be liable to Capital Gains Tax and Inheritance
Tax. However, these tax charges are not incurred if an
owner sells the object by private treaty to a body (e.g.
a museum or gallery) listed under schedule 3 to the
Inheritance Tax Act 1984. Qualifying heritage objects
include any previously granted conditional exemption
or an item which would qualify as of preeminent
importance. This dispensation was extended in April
2009 to corporation tax on companies’ chargeable
gains. This is an advantageous arrangement because
a public collection will need to raise less purchase
funds than what would have been paid under normal
arrangements to the extent of a proportion of the
tax (usually 75 per cent) that would otherwise
have been chargeable. As an incentive to vendors
to offer qualifying heritage objects first to British
public collections, the remaining proportion of the
tax (usually 25 per cent) that would otherwise have
been chargeable may be retained by the vendor.
Schedule 3 to the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 lists those
museums which are able to benefit from a ‘douceur’
when acquiring works of art that are subject to either
inheritance tax, capital gains tax or corporation tax
on sale.

Advisory Council
Many different branches of art and learning have an
interest in the export of cultural objects and all the
issues associated with it, as do many different UK
institutions. They cannot all be represented on the
Reviewing Committee, but their knowledge and advice
is valuable. The original Waverley Committee therefore
recommended the creation of a widely representative
Advisory Council, which would meet from time to time,
as circumstances might require, to discuss matters of
common interest and the operation of the system as a
whole. It was envisaged that the Council would advise
whether the right standards were being applied to the
different categories of objects, as well as enabling
institutions, not least regional ones, and the art trade
to make their views known.
Membership of the Council includes the expert advisers
(who refer objects to the Committee and are normally
appointed by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media
and Sport as ‘champions’ for their retention when the
decision on the export licence is deferred), as well as
representatives of the institutions seeking to acquire
deferred items, of grant-making bodies, of the art
trade and of interested associations (see Appendix I
for full details).
The Advisory Council is normally convened annually
and met most recently on 8 June 2016. The main focus
of this year’s meeting was particular acquisitions and
cases across the 2015–16 year. Speakers addressed
the Advisory Council on ‘The Importance of Regional
Museums and Galleries’ and ‘Regional Museums
and the pressures they are facing in the current
environment’. The Council also considered the draft
policy section of the Reviewing Committee’s Annual
Report for 2015–16. Its comments have been fully
considered and are reflected in this text.

Manuscripts, documents
and archives
The Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents
and Archives is a sub-committee of the Reviewing
Committee. Its terms of reference were revised in
2005 and are as follows:
‘To consider the present arrangements for the export
control of manuscripts, documents and archives, and
the sources of funds available (to UK institutions) for
their acquisition and to make recommendations
resulting from this consideration.’
The membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts,
Documents and Archives is detailed in Appendix K.

72 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

The Working Party usually meets annually, although it
may meet more frequently if necessary. It met most
recently on 16 May 2016 when it considered the current
limit for Open Individual Export Licences. The Working
Party also discussed the increase in the sale of manuscripts
on eBay, the definition of marginalia, progress on
developing an electronic licence application system and
the provision of copies of manuscripts in place of originals.
The Working Party then looked at sources of financial
help for the acquisition of manuscripts, documents and
archives. Written reports had been submitted by the
ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund, the PRISM Fund, the
Friends of the National Libraries, the Secretary of the
Acceptance in Lieu Panel and The National Archives
sales catalogue monitoring service. The HLF and
National Heritage Memorial Fund provided details of
funding towards archival and manuscript material.
i) The ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
During 2015–16, the ACE/V&A Purchase Grant
Fund considered 23 cases in respect of manuscripts,
documents and archival photographs, and offered
16 grants totalling £165,343, enabling purchases
amounting to £724,276 to go ahead. Items purchased
ranged from an 18th century survey of the estates
of William Richardson, 1774 bought by West Sussex
Record Office, to the archive of Laurens van der Post,
1920s–1996 acquired by Durham University Library.
The Royal Asiatic Society in London received support
for the first time when it purchased the early 19th
century archive of the orientalist Thomas Manning.
ii) The PRISM Fund
The PRISM Fund supports the acquisition and
conservation of material relating to all fields of the
history of science, technology, industry and medicine.
During 2015–16, it made three grants towards the
acquisition and conservation of archival or similar
material. These grants totalled £33,784 for the
acquisition of a letter from Nevil Maskelyne to Joseph
Banks by the Herschel Museum of Astronomy; the
acquisition of the Warwick Healey Motor Company
Archive by Warwickshire County Council; and the
conservation of Company School botanical drawings
at the Royal Albert Memorial Museum.
iii) The Friends of the National Libraries
The Friends assist various institutions primarily by
promoting the acquisition of printed books, manuscripts
and records of historical, literary, artistic, architectural
and musical interest. The Friends made or committed 35
grants to 33 institutions in 2015, totalling £127,013 from
the operating fund and £33,500 from the restricted
funds. Over £108,000 was awarded to university
libraries, local record offices and smaller institutions.

iv) The HLF and NHMF
In 2015–16, the HLF committed £124,300 to acquisition
and conservation of manuscripts and documents, and
the NHMF committed £734,300 for acquisition and
conservation of projects, an overall total of £858,600.
The recipients of the NHMF grants included the Bodleian
Library, for its acquisition of the early manuscript of
Good Friday Riding Westward by John Doone; The
Bronte Society for the acquisition of the Bronte family’s
copy of The Remains of Henry Kirke White by Robert
Southney; and The British Library for the acquisition
of an English translation of Erasmus’ Enchiridion Militis
Chirstiani. The HLF’s largest award this year was
to Kresen Kernow, the new Public Record Office
for Cornwall.
v) Acceptance in Lieu
Acceptance in Lieu and the Cultural Gifts Scheme are
also an important means of retaining archival material
within the United Kingdom. During 2015–16, the
schemes bought into public ownership a wide range
of archival material including the Kennett Family Papers,
the Hobson Bookbinding Archive, the Vincent Novello
album, literary and publishing correspondence contained
in the archive of children’s author and illustrator Nicholas
Allan and letters and notes written by the artist Lucian
Freud which formed part of the Lucian Freud Archive.
Information on all works of art and archival material
accepted in 2015–16 can be found on the Arts Council’s
website at www.artscouncil.org.uk.
vi) The National Archives sales catalogue
monitoring service
The sales catalogue monitoring service, among its other
functions, notifies repositories when manuscripts and
archives become available for acquisition through public
sales. This service is greatly valued by repositories and the
Working Party commends the assistance it gives them.
In 2015–16, 73 items were purchased by 42 different
repositories as a result of notifications. However, there
were 32 unsuccessful bids as repositories were outbid
or dealers had already disposed of stock.
The Working Party strongly endorses the work of these
funds, schemes and services, and expresses its thanks to
the advisers and administrators of all of them, who work
hard, often at very short notice, to enable applicants
to acquire material. The Working Party notes that the
national endorsement they provide to local institutions
is often as valuable as the financial assistance given.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 73

Table 1
The statistics below show the figures for the number of cases from 2006–07 to 2015–16.
(1)
Year

(2)
Cases
considered
by the
Committee

(3)
Cases
where
a decision
on the
licence
application
was
deferred

(4)
Cases in
(3) where
items
were not
licensed for
permanent
export

(5)
Cases
where
items
were not
licensed for
permanent
export as
% of (3)

(6)
Value (at
deferral)
of cases in
(4) where
items
were not
licensed for
permanent
export (£m)

(7)
Cases in
(3) where
items were
licensed for
permanent
export

(8)
Cases
where
items were
licensed for
permanent
export as
% of (3)

(9)
Value of
items in (3)
(at deferral)
licensed for
export (£m)

2006–07

28

191

14 2

74

11.8

4

21

10.7

2007–08

18

16

9

56

2.5

7

44

12.8

2008–09

22

2009–10

16

9

56

1.5

7

44

14.2

13

5

7

54

10.1

6

46

60.8

14

7

7

50

5.9

7

50

65.8

4

57

29.8

3

43

44.8

7

37

11.2

12

63

103.5

22

8

36

13.9

14

64

66.9

17

12

510

4210

6.7

6

50

25.7

25

21

13 11

62 11

48.4 11

6

29

37.5

206

159

83

52

72

45

442.7

14

4

2010–11

18

6

2011–12

11

7

2012–13

24

19

2013–14

29

2014–15
2015–16
Totals

3

8

1

141.8

9

	Excludes one case where an item was originally thought to meet Waverley criteria, but was subsequently found to have been imported
into the UK within the last 50 years.
2
	Excludes one case still under deferral at the time of writing and includes two cases where the licence application was withdrawn during
the deferral period.
3
	Includes one case where the licence application was refused at the end of the first deferral period because the owner refused to confirm
that they were willing to accept a matching offer from a UK purchaser.
4
Excludes one case which was carried over to 2010–11.
5
Excludes one case which was carried over to 2010–11.
6
Includes one case which was carried over from 2009–10.
7
Includes one case which was carried over from 2009–10.
8
Includes one case which was considered in 2011–12 but referred to the Secretary of State in 2012–13.
9
	Includes one case where the applicant was informed that a licence could be issued, but decided to continue negotiations with a UK
purchaser. To date, an export licence has not been issued.
10
Excludes one case still under deferral at the time the Statistical Release was published (Statue of Sekhemka) but later licensed for export.
11
Excludes two case still under deferral at the time of writing and includes four cases where the licence application was withdrawn
during the deferral period.

74 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Table 2
The statistics below show the figures for the values associated with cases from 2006–07 to 2015–16.
(1)
Year

(2)
Cases where
a decision on
the licence
application
was deferred

(3)
Value of
items in (2)
(£m)

(4)
Cases where
items were
acquired by
institutions
or individuals
in the UK (4)1

(5)
Value (at
deferral)
of items in
(4) (£m)

(6)
Value of
items in
(5) as % of
(3) (£m)

(7)
Cases where
the application
was refused
or withdrawn
after the
announcement
of the
Secretary
of State’s
decision

(8)
Value of
items in
(7) (£m)

2006–07

19 2

24.5

12

7.0

29

3

4.8

2007–08

16

15.3

8

1.4

9

1

1.1

2008–09

16

2009–10

15.7

9

1.5

10

0

0

13

3

71.5

6

10.1

14

1

0.6

2010–11

14

4

71.7

4

3.8

5

3

2.1

2011–12

7

74.6

4

29.8

40

0

0

2012–13

19

114.8

6

11.2

10

1

0.04

2013–14

22

80.7

8

13.9

17

1

12.56

2014–15

12

48.2

5

6.7

14

0

0

2015–16

21

116.6

9

7.0

6

4

41.3

159

633.6

71

92.4

15

14

62.44

Totals

5

1

	This only includes items purchased by individuals who agreed to guarantee satisfactory public access, conservation and security
arrangements.
2
	Excludes one case where an item was originally thought to be Waverley but was subsequently found to have been imported into the UK
within the last 50 years.
3
Excludes one case which was carried over into 2010–11.
4
Includes one case which was carried over from 2009–10.
5
Includes one case which was carried over from 2011–12.
6
	Deferred at £12.5 million; export licence application was withdrawn and the item was subsequently purchased
for £10 million.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 75

Appendix B
History of export controls in the UK
The reasons for controlling the export of what are
now known as cultural goods were first recognised in
the UK at the end of the 19th and beginning of the
20th centuries. Private collections in the UK had become
the prey of American and German collectors and it was
apparent that many were being depleted and important
works of art sold abroad at prices in excess of anything
that UK public collections or private buyers could afford.
It was against this background that the National Art
Collections Fund was established in 1903, to help UK
national and regional public collections to acquire
objects that they could not afford by themselves.
Until 1939, the UK had no legal controls on the export
of works of art, books, manuscripts and other antiques.
The outbreak of the Second World War made it
necessary to impose controls on exports generally in
order to conserve national resources. As part of the
war effort, Parliament enacted the Import, Export and
Customs Powers (Defence) Act 1939, and in addition
the Defence (Finance) Regulations, which were intended
not to restrict exports but to ensure that, when goods
were exported outside the Sterling Area, they earned
their proper quota of foreign exchange. In 1940,
antiques and works of art were brought under this
system of licensing.
It was in 1950 that the then Labour Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir Stafford Cripps, established a committee
under the Chairmanship of the First Viscount Waverley
‘to consider and advise on the policy to be adopted by
His Majesty’s Government in controlling the export of
works of art, books, manuscripts, armour and antiques
and to recommend what arrangements should be made
for the practical operation of policy’. The Committee
reported in 1952 to RA Butler, Chancellor in the
subsequent Conservative administration, and its
conclusions still form the basis of the arrangements
in place today.
Current export controls
The export controls are derived from both UK and EU
legislation. The UK statutory powers are exercised by
the Secretary of State under the Export Control Act
2002. Under the Act, the Secretary of State for Culture,
Media and Sport has made the Export of Objects of
Cultural Interest (Control) Order 2003. Export controls
are also imposed by Council Regulation (EC) No
116/2009 on the export of cultural goods. The control
is enforced by the Border Force, a law enforcement
command within the Home Office. If an item within
the scope of the legislation is exported without an
appropriate licence, the exporter and any other party

76 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

concerned with the unlicensed export of the object
concerned may be subject to penalties, including
criminal prosecution, under the Customs and Excise
Management Act 1979.
The Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works
of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
An independent Reviewing Committee on the Export
of Works of Art was first appointed in 1952 following
the recommendations of the Waverley Committee. It
succeeded an earlier committee of the same name
established in 1949, comprising museum directors and
officials, which heard appeals against refusals and, from
1950, all cases where refusals were recommended. The
Committee’s terms of reference, as set out in the
Waverley Report, were:
i) to advise on the principles which should govern the
control of export of works of art and antiques under
the Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence)
Act 1939;
ii) to consider all the cases where refusal of an export
licence for a work of art or antique is suggested on
grounds of national importance;
iii) to advise in cases where a Special Exchequer Grant
is needed towards the purchase of an object that
would otherwise be exported; and
iv) to supervise the operation of the export control
system generally.
These were subsequently revised following the
recommendations of the Quinquennial Review, which
also recommended that the Committee’s name be
expanded by adding ‘and Objects of Cultural Interest’.
(See Appendix C for revised terms of reference.)
The Committee is a non-statutory independent body
whose role is to advise the Secretary of State whether a
cultural object, which is the subject of an application for
an export licence, is a national treasure. It will designate
an object as a national treasure if it considers that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune on one
or more of the three grounds given below, which are
collectively known as the Waverley criteria (so named
after Viscount Waverley) and which were spelt out in
the conclusions of the Waverley Report.
The Committee consists of eight full members,
appointed by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media
and Sport, seven of whom have particular expertise in
one or more relevant fields (paintings, furniture,
manuscripts etc), and a Chair. A list of members during
2015–16 is at the front of this report and brief details of
members are included in Appendix D.

The Waverley criteria
The Committee will designate an object as a national
treasure if it considers that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune on one or more of the following
three grounds:
History

Aesthetics

Scholarship

Is it closely
connected with
our history and
national life?

Is it of
outstanding
aesthetic
importance?

Is it of
outstanding
significance for
the study of
some particular
branch of art,
learning
or history?

Waverley 1

Waverley 2

Waverley 3

They are not mutually exclusive and an object can,
depending on its character, meet one, two or three of
the criteria.
The Committee reaches a decision on the merits of any
object which the relevant expert adviser draws to its
attention.
A meeting is held at which both the expert adviser and
the applicant submit a case and can question the other
party. The permanent Committee members are joined
for each hearing by independent assessors (usually
three), who are acknowledged experts in the field of
the object under consideration. They temporarily
become full members of the Committee for the
duration of the consideration of the item in question.
If the Committee concludes that an item meets at least
one of the Waverley criteria, its recommendation is
passed on to the Secretary of State. The Committee
also passes on an assessment of the item’s qualities and
a recommendation as to the length of time for which
the decision on the export licence should be deferred,
to provide UK institutions and private individuals with
a chance to raise the money to purchase the item to
enable it to remain in this country. It is the Secretary of
State who decides whether an export licence should be
granted or whether it should be deferred, pending the
possible receipt of a suitable matching offer from within
the UK which will lead to the refusal of the licence if it
is turned down.

Since the Committee was set up in 1952, many
important works of art have been retained in the UK
as a result of its intervention. These embrace many
different categories. An illustrative selection includes:
Paintings: Titian’s The Death of Actaeon (1971),
Raphael’s Madonna of the Pinks (2004), Manet’s
Portrait of Mademoiselle Claus (2012) and, from the
British school, Reynolds’ The Archers (2005).
Sculptures: The Three Graces by Canova (1993).
Antiquities: a ‘jadeite’ Neolithic axe-head brought
into Britain circa 4000 BC (2007).
Porcelain: a 102-piece Sevres dinner service presented
to the Duke of Wellington (1979).
Furniture: a lady’s secretaire by Thomas Chippendale
(1998) and a pair of Italian console tables with
marquetry tops by Lucio de Lucci, the bases attributed
to Andrea Brustolon.
Silver: a Charles II two-handled silver porringer and
cover, circa 1660, attributed to the workshop of
Christian van Vianen (1999).
Textiles: a felt appliqué and patch-worked album
coverlet made by Ann West in 1820 (2006).
Manuscripts: the Foundation Charter of Westminster
Abbey (1980) and the Macclesfield Psalter (2005).
This short list shows quite clearly the immense cultural
and historic value of what has been achieved.
Unfortunately, and perhaps almost inevitably, some
have got away. Noteworthy examples include David
Sacrificing before the Ark by Rubens (1961), A Portrait
of Juan de Pareja by Velázquez (1971), Sunflowers by
Van Gogh (1986) and Portrait of an Elderly Man by
Rembrandt (1999). Among items other than pictures
that have been exported are The Burdett Psalter (1998),
The World History of Rashid al-Din (1980), The Codex
Leicester by Leonardo da Vinci (1980), the Jenkins or
Barberini Venus (2003) and Ordination by Nicolas
Poussin (2011), Vue sur L’Estaque et la Chateau d’If by
Paul Cézanne (2015), all of which are of the highest
quality in their field. By any measure, these are all
losses to the UK of items of world significance.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 77

Appendix C

Appendix D

Terms of reference of the
Reviewing Committee on the
Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest

Membership of the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of
Works of Art and Objects of
Cultural Interest during 2015–16
Sir Hayden Phillips GCB DL (Chair)

The Committee was established in 1952 following
the recommendations of the Waverley Committee
in its report in September of that year. Its terms of
reference are:
a) to advise on the principles which should govern the
control of export of objects of cultural interest under
the Export Control Act 2002 and on the operation
of the export control system generally;
b) to advise the Secretary of State on all cases where
refusal of an export licence for an object of cultural
interest is suggested on grounds of national
importance; and
c) to advise in cases where a special Exchequer grant
is needed towards the purchase of an object that
would otherwise be exported.

Sir Hayden Phillips is the Independent Reviewer of the
Rulings of the Advertising Standards Authority. He is
also a Director of the Energy Saving Trust and of St Just
Farms Ltd; and Chairman of the Wellington Collection
Management Committee and of the IPSO Appointments
Panel. He is a Deputy Lieutenant of Wiltshire, a Lay
Canon of Salisbury Cathedral and Chairman of its Fabric
Advisory Committee. He was Chairman of the National
Theatre from 2004–10 and of Marlborough College
(2006–13). Sir Hayden’s previous career was in the Civil
Service, latterly heading two Departments as Permanent
Secretary – the Department for Culture, Media & Sport
from 1992–98, and the Lord Chancellor’s Department
(now the Ministry of Justice) from 1998 to 2004. He
reviewed the Honours System (report 2004) and the
Funding of Political Parties (report 2007).
Appointed 17 March 2014: appointment expires
16 March 2019

78 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Peter Barber
Peter Barber, former Head of Cartographic and
Topographic Materials at the British Library, has
many exhibitions to his name, and was awarded an
OBE for services to Cartography and Topography in
2012. He began his career at The British Library in the
Department of Manuscripts where he was involved in
the cataloguing of the Blenheim and Althorp archives
and oversaw the acquisition of a number of important
manuscripts. He was a consultant to several television
series on the history of maps and was editor and
principal contributor to Tales from the Map Room: Face
and Diction about Maps and their makers (1993) and
The Map Book (2005), and author of The Queen Mary
Atlas: Commentary (2005) and Kind Henry’s Map of the
British Isles: BL Cotton MS Augustus I.i.9: Commentary
(2009) as well as contributing an extended chapter on
mapmaking in England between 1470 and 1650 to
volume 3 of the University of Chicago’s multi-volume,
History of Cartography. He is a Vice President of the
Hakluyt Society and a Trustee of the Hereford Mappa
Mundi Trust. He is a Council Member of the Society
of Antiquaries’ Library and Collections Committee,
and a past Council Member of the Royal Numismatic
and British Art Medal Societies. He has recently been
appointed a Visiting Professor in the Department of
History at King’s College London and has been elected
President of the Hornsey Historical Society. He is also a
board member of The Lauderdale House Society Ltd.
Appointed 1 August 2015: appointment expires
on 31 July 2019

Richard Calvocoressi
Richard Calvocoressi, Director and Senior Curator of
the Gagosian Gallery, London (2015–present), former
Director of the Henry Moore Foundation and former
Keeper, and then Director, of the Scottish National
Gallery of Modern Art (1987–2007), was originally
a curator at the Tate Gallery (1979–87), where he
was responsible for building up the collections of
pre- and postwar European art. He also organised
major exhibitions of Jean Tinguely (1982) and Oskar
Kokoschka (1986). In Scotland, he acquired important
international collections of dada and surrealist art from
the estates of Roland Penrose and Gabrielle Keiller and
was instrumental in attracting the Anthony d’Offay gift
to Edinburgh and London. Richard Calvocoressi has
published on various artists, including Francis Bacon,
Georg Baselitz, Reg Butler, Lucian Freud, Anselm Kiefer,

Paul Klee, René Magritte, Lee Miller, Henry Moore,
Michael Andrews and Yves Klein. He is an Expert
Member of the Comité Magritte and a Trustee of the
Art Fund. In 2008, he was awarded a CBE for services
to the arts, particularly in Scotland.
Appointed 13 November 2012: appointment
expires 12 November 2020

Philippa Glanville
Philippa Glanville FSA is currently a Trustee of the Art
Fund and a member of the Westminster Abbey Fabric
Commission. Former Curatorial Adviser to the Harley
Foundation, Trustee of the Belmont House Trust,
Bishopsland Educational Trust and the Geffrye Museum,
she is a Past Master of the Company of Arts Scholars and
a Liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths.
She was awarded an OBE in 2015 for services to the
history of decorative arts and heritage. A historian and
curator at the London Museum, Museum of London
and Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A), she was
Keeper of Metalwork at the V&A from 1989–99.
From 1999 to 2003, she was Academic Director at
Waddesdon Manor (the Rothschild Collection), and
Associate Curator at the Gilbert Collection, Somerset
House. She writes on silver, social history and the history
of collecting; her books include London in Maps
(Connoisseur/Ebury Press 1972), Silver in England
(Unwin Hyman 1972, Routledge 2010), Silver in Tudor
& Early Stuart England (V&A 1990), Women Silversmiths
1697–1845 (with J.Goldsborough, Thames & Hudson
1991), for the V&A, Silver, Elegant Eating and The
Art of Drinking (1996, 2002, 2007) and for the Harley
Foundation, Dinner with a Duke (2010). Philippa has
contributed to many publications including City
Merchants & the Arts 1670–1720 (Oblong/Corporation
of London 2004), Feeding Desire (Cooper Hewitt
2006), Les Tables Royals en Europe & Quand Versailles
etait Meuble en Argent (RMN & Chateau de Versailles
1993 & 2001), Treasures of the English Church
(Goldsmiths Company/Holberton 2008) and Baroque
(V&A 2009).
Appointed 2 April 2010: appointment expires
1 April 2018

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 79

Christopher Rowell

Leslie Webster

Christopher Rowell was appointed to the curatorial staff
of the National Trust in 1977 and has been Furniture
Curator since 2002, advising on the Trust’s collections
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. He is Chairman
of the Furniture History Society and a Fellow of the
Society of Antiquaries. He has published widely, mainly
on country house collections, the display of art, and
furniture. He was editor and principal contributor to
Ham House: 400 Years of Collecting and Patronage
(2013), which was shortlisted for the William MB
Berger Prize for British Art History 2014, and has also
contributed to Hardwick Hall: A Great Old Castle of
Romance (2016), the second book in this series on the
Trust’s most significant houses, which is published by
Yale University Press for the National Trust and the
Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art.

Former Keeper of the Department of Prehistory and
Europe, and senior curator of the early medieval
collections at the British Museum, she specialises
particularly in the Anglo-Saxon and Viking period,
on which she publishes and lectures widely. Her latest
book is Anglo-Saxon Art: a new History (2012). She is
currently Honorary Visiting Professor at the Institute of
Archaeology, UCL. She co-curated four major exhibitions
on early medieval themes at the British Museum, and
also co-ordinated a series of exhibitions in five major
European museums, as part of the European Science
Foundation’s Transformation of the Roman World AD
400–900 Project. She has served as a Trustee and
committee member on many professional bodies,
including the Society of Antiquaries of London, the
Royal Archaeological Institute, and the Society for
Medieval Archaeology, where she served as President
from 2007–10. Other advisory work has included
membership of the former English Heritage Museums
and Archives Advisory Panel, the British Academy
Corpus of Anglo-Saxon Stone Sculpture Committee,
and the National Heritage Memorial Fund Advisory
Panel. She is actively engaged in the Staffordshire
Hoard Research Project, and is co-editor of the
forthcoming publication of this major Anglo-Saxon find.

Appointed 10 April 2015: appointment expires
9 April 2019

Aidan Weston-Lewis
Aidan Weston-Lewis has worked at the National Gallery
of Scotland since 1992, where he is Chief Curator, with
responsibility for the Italian and Spanish collections.
Before that he was Assistant Librarian at the Witt
Photographic Library at the Courtauld Institute of Art in
London. He has organised a series of major exhibitions
and has published widely in his area of specialism,
particularly on North Italian painting and drawing of the
16th and 17th centuries. In 2005, Aidan received from
the Italian Republic the honour of Cavaliere dell’Ordine
della Stella della Solidarietà Italiana in recognition of his
contribution to the study of Italian art.
Appointed 10 May 2011: appointment expires
9 May 2019

Lowell Libson
Lowell Libson is an art dealer and Managing Director
and Proprietor of Lowell Libson Ltd, which specialises
in British paintings, watercolours and drawings of the
17th to 20th centuries. His specialist area of expertise
is the art market and British works of the
aforementioned period.
Appointed 3 June 2011: appointment expires
9 April 2019

Appointed 18 February 2013: appointment expires
17 February 2021

Dr Christopher Wright
Dr Christopher Wright joined the Department of
Manuscripts, British Library, in 1974 and was Head of
Manuscripts from 2003 until his retirement in October
2005. He is a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries
London (2002) and a Fellow of the Royal Historical
Society (1982). His publications include George III (2005)
and, as editor, Sir Robert Cotton as Collector: Essays on
an Early Stuart Courtier (1997). From 1989–99, he was
editor of the British Library Journal. He served as a
Trustee of the Sir Winston Churchill Archives Trust,
Cambridge (2001–05) and was on the Council of the
Friends of the National Libraries (2003–06). From
August 2005, Christopher has been a Trustee of The
Handwriting of Italian Humanists. He was a member
of he Acceptance in Lieu Panel, Arts Council England,
from 2005–2015.
Appointed 20 November 2006: appointment
expired 31 July 2015

80 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Appendix E
List of independent assessors who attended meetings during 2015–16
Charles Beddington, Charles Beddington Ltd
Rufus Bird, Deputy Surveyor of the Queen’s Works of Art, Royal Collection Trust
Dr Xavier Bray, Arturo and Melosi Chief Curator, Dulwich Picture Gallery
Professor Christopher Brown, Former Director, Ashmolean Museum
Dr David Caldwell, Former Keeper of Scottish and European History,
National Museums of Scotland
Dr Lorne Campbell, Former Senior Research Curator, National Gallery
Martin Clayton, Head of Prints and Drawings, Royal Collection Trust
Katie Coombs, Curator of Paintings, Victoria & Albert Museum
Professor Elizabeth Cowling, Professor of 20th century European Art,
University of Edinburgh
Daniel Crouch, Daniel Crouch Rare Books LLP
Professor Stephen Daniels, Professor of Cultural Geography, University of Nottingham
Professor Kurt Drickamer, Professor of Biochemistry, Imperial College London
Professor Felix Driver, Professor of Human Geography, Royal Holloway
Adrian Eeles, Independent Consultant
James Faber, Day and Faber
Francesca Galloway, Francesca Galloway Ltd
Johnny van Haeften, Director Johnny van Haeften Ltd
Matthew Hall, Director, Erskine, Hall & Coe
Karen Hearn, Honorary Professor, Department of English Language and Literature, UCL
Dr Timothy Hunter, Independent Consultant
Dr Catherine Johns, Former Curator of the Romano-British Collections at the
British Museum
Alastair Laing, Curator Emeritus of Pictures and Sculpture, The National Trust
Catherine Lampert, Independent Consultant
Sir John Leighton, Director-General, National Galleries Scotland
Martin Levy, Director, H. Blairman & Sons Ltd
Bruce Lindsay, Director, Harris Lindsay Ltd
Stuart Lochhead, Director, Daniel Katz Limited
Professor Richard Marks, Professor History of Art, University of Cambridge
Dr Joanna Marschner, Senior Curator, Kensington Palace
Patrick Matthiesen, The Matthiesen Gallery
Donald F. McLean, Independent Author and Phonovision Expert
Nathalie Morris, Senior Curator, Special Collections, British Film Institute Archive
Richard Nagy, Richard Nagy Ltd
Susie Nash, Professor of Renaissance Art, The Courtauld Institute of Art
Maria Newbery, Curator of Maritime and Local History, Southampton City Council
Professor Simon Olding, Director, Crafts Study Centre, University for the Creative Arts
Anthony Phillips, Former Head of Silver Department, Christie’s
Dr Tacye Phillipson, Senior Curator of Modern Science and Computing,
National Museums Scotland

Case 25
Case 12, 22
Case 4, 25
Case 24
Case 23
Case 8
Case 17
Case 21
Case 16
Case 3
Case 3
Case 9
Case 3
Case 19
Case 17
Case 14, 15
Case 4
Case 6
Case 21
Case 1, 8, 13
Case 5
Case 24
Case 16
Case 1
Case 12, 22
Case 12, 20, 22
Case 23
Case 18
Case 14, 15
Case 10
Case 2
Case 2
Case 16
Case 8
Case 7
Case 6
Case 11
Case 9

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 81

Andrew Reynolds, Professor of Medieval Archaeology, UCL
Sir Hugh Roberts, Surveyor Emeritus of the Queen’s Works of Art
Simon Rooks, Head of Archive Policy, BBC Archives
David Scrase, Former Assistant Director of Collections, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge
Dr Karen Serres, Schroder Foundation Curator of Paintings, The Courtauld Gallery
Lewis Smith, Koopman Rare Art Ltd
Anthony Speelman, Managing Director, Edward Speelman Ltd
Julian Stair, potter and academic, Julian Stair Studio
Timothy Stevens, Former Director, The Gilbert Collection Trust
Simon Swynfen Jervis, Independent Consultant
Sir Christopher White, Former Director, Ashmolean Museum
Dr Paul Williamson, Keeper Emeritus and Honorary Senior Research Fellow,
Victoria and Albert Museum
Mark Weiss, Director, The Weiss Gallery
Ian Whitehead, Keeper of Maritime History, Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums
Lucy Whitaker, Assistant Surveyor of The Queen’s Pictures, The Royal Collection
Wynyard Wilkinson, Independent Silver Dealer

82 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Case 5
Case 20
Case 2
Case 10, 17,
19, 25
Case 1
Case 18
Case 13, 24
Case 6
Case 11
Case 20
Case 4, 13
Case 23
Case 21
Case 7
Case 10
Case 11

Appendix F
Value of items placed under deferral (2006–07 to 2015–16)
i) for which permanent licences were issued and
ii) where items were purchased by UK institutions or individuals
(1)
Year

(2)
Value of
items where
a decision on
the licence
application
was deferred
(£m)

(3)
Value (at
deferral)
of cases in
(2) where
items were
licensed for
permanent
export
(£m)

(4)
Value of
items in (3)
as % of (2)

(5)
Value of
items in (2)
that were
not licensed
for export
(£m)

(6)
Value (at
deferral)
of cases in
(2) where
items were
purchased
by UK
institutions
or individuals1
(£m)

(7)
Value of
items in (6)
as % of (2)

2006–07

24.5

10.72

44

11.8

7.0

29

2007–08

15.3

12.8

84

2.5

1.4

9

2008–09

15.7

14.2

90

1.5

1.5

10

2009–10

71.5

60.8

85

10.73

10.1

14

2010–11

71.7

65.8

92

5.9

3.8

5

2011–12

74.6

44.8

60

29.8

29.8

40

2012–13

114.8

103.5

90

11.2

11.2

10

2013–14

80.7

66.9

83

13.9

13.9

17

2014–15

48.2

25.7

54

22.5

6.7

14

2015–16

116.6

37.5

32

48.45

7.0

6

Totals

633.6

442.7

70

92.4

15

4

158.2

1

	This only includes items purchased by individuals who agreed to guarantee satisfactory public access, conservation and
security arrangements.
2
	Excludes one case where the item was originally found to meet Waverley criteria, but was subsequently found to have been imported into
the UK within the last 50 years.
3
Includes value of one case (£554,937.50) where the application was withdrawn during the deferral period.
4
	Includes value of one case (£389,600) where a matching offer was refused and the Secretary of State therefore refused an export licence,
and the value of two cases (£1,645,868) where the application was withdrawn during the deferral period.
5
	Excludes two case still under deferral at the time of writing and includes four cases where the licence application was withdrawn during
the deferral period.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 83

Appendix G
Items licensed for export after reference to expert advisers
for advice as to national importance
Category

Advising authority

No of
items

Total
value (£)

Arms and armour

Royal Armouries, Leeds, Director general

12

3,049,200

Architectural models

Sir John Soane Museum, Deputy Director

1

98,000

Books, maps etc

British Library, Keeper of Printed Books, Head of
Map Collections

52

5,612,532

Books, drawings and
manuscripts (natural history)

Natural History Museum, Special Collections
Manager Library & Archives

5

287,540

Clocks and watches

British Museum, Keeper of Clocks and Watches

22

4,274,900

Coins and medals

British Museum, Keeper of Coins and Medals

189

4,831,808

Drawings: architectural,
engineering and scientific

Victoria and Albert Museum, Keeper of Word &
Image Department

36

102,700

Drawings, prints,
watercolours

British Museum, Keeper of Prints and Drawings

164

57,716,483

Egyptian antiquities

British Museum, Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities

14

5,180,300

Ethnography and Western
Asiatic Antiquities

British Museum, Keeper of Ethnography

7

13,727,848

Furniture and woodwork

Victoria and Albert Museum, Keeper of Furniture
and Textiles & Fashion Department

59

14,501,912

Greek and Roman antiquities

British Museum, Keeper of Greek and Roman
Antiquities

10

5,557,400

Indian furniture, textiles and
works of art

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Asian Department, South & South East Asian
Collection

8

658,500

Japanese antiquities

British Museum, Department of Asia

4

2,411,150

Manuscripts, documents
and archives

British Library, Curator, Department of Manuscripts

1,647

221,680,876

Maritime material, including
paintings

National Maritime Museum, Director of Collections

13

919,004

Middle East antiquities

British Museum, Keeper of Middle East Antiquities

45

13,374,194

Musical Instruments

Curator of Musical Instrument Museums Edinburgh

27

14,264,538

Oriental antiquities
(except Japanese)

British Museum, Department of Asia

97

33,671,713

Oriental furniture,
porcelain and works of art

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator
of Asian Department, Chinese Collection

28

5,687,774

Paintings, British, modern

Tate Gallery

207

339,269,455

Paintings, foreign pre 1900

National Gallery, Director

121

258,725,384

Paintings, miniature and
pastels

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Painting Section, Word & Image Department

4

402,225

Paintings, portraits
of British persons

National Portrait Gallery, Director

88

317,482,118

84 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

Category

Advising authority

No of
items

Total
value (£)

Photographs

National Media Museum, Head

190

8,853,988

Pottery and ceramics

Victoria and Albert Museum,
Head of Ceramics & Glass Department

16

2,049,470

Prehistory & Europe (inc.
Archaeological material,
Medieval and later antiquities
& Metal Detecting Finds)

British Museum, Keeper of Prehistory & Europe
Department of Portable Antiquities & Treasure
(Metal Detecting Finds)

31,649

17,688,760

Scientific and mechanical
material

Science Museum, Head of Collections

1

8,840

Sculpture

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Sculpture, Metalwork, Ceramic & Glass Department
Tate Gallery (20th Century Sculpture)

98

46,598,528

Silver and weapons, Scottish

National Museum of Scotland, Director

0

0

Silver, metalwork and
jewellery

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Sculpture, Metalwork, Ceramic & Glass Department

130

30,414,522

Tapestries, carpets
(and textiles)

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Furniture, Textiles & Fashion Department

13

1,929,353

Toys

Bethnal Green Museum of Childhood, Head

0

0

Transport

Heritage Motor Centre

39

48,539,727

Wallpaper

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Prints Section, Word & Image Department

0

0

War orders, medals
and decorations

Imperial War Museum

3

1,023,843

Zoology (stuffed specimens)

Natural History Museum, Director of Science

0

0

34,999

1,480,594,585

Totals

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 85

Appendix H
Applications considered and deferred on the recommendation
of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art
and Objects of Cultural Interest, 2006–07 to 2015–16
Year

Number of
Waverley
items
granted a
permanent
export
licence

Value of
Waverley
items
granted a
permanent
export
licence
(£)

Number
of
Waverley
items
purchased
during
deferral

2006–07

51

10,709,778

12

2007–08

7

12,770,031

2008–09

7

14,186,010

2009–10

6

2010–11

7

Total
value of
Waverley
items
purchased
during
deferral
(£)

Number
of Waverley
items
supported
by Heritage
Lottery
Fund/
National
Heritage
Memorial
Fund

7,009,075

4

8

1,431,256

9

1,521,684

60,813,750

6

65,837,016

4

Support
by
Heritage
Lottery
Fund/
National
Heritage
Memorial
Fund
(£)

Number
of
Waverley
items
supported
by the Art
Fund

Support
by the
Art Fund
(£)

Number
of
Waverley
items
supported
by V&A
Purchase
Grant
Fund

Support
by V&A
Purchase
Grant
Fund
(£)

1,944,032

3

700,275

2

40,000

6

471,986

6

248,750

2

50,000

2

378,000

4

329,292

3

118,500

10,119,674

2

186,000

3

245,100

1

17,000

3,752,918

3

2,410,000

4

470,000

1

20,000

2011–12

3

44,830,190

4

9,252,560

2

6,025,000

2

1,100,000

0

0

2012–13

122

103,543,500

6

11,165,750

2

3,952,900

3

508,250

2

32,000

2013–14

14

66,862,143

8

13,852,095

1

6,300,000

4

820,000

1

10,000

2014–15

6

25,658,700

5

6,694,400

3

508,000

3

175,662

0

0

2015–16

6

37,460,300

9

7,000,513

6

3,505,215

5

910,000

0

0

1

	Includes one item where the licence was issued following receipt of satisfactory proof that it had been imported into the UK within
the last 50 years.
2
	Includes one case where the applicant was informed that a licence could be issued, but decided to continue negotiations with a
UK purchaser. To date, an export licence has not been issued.

86 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

2015–16 (detail) – acquisitions
Year

Item

Purchaser

Price
(£)

Support by
Heritage
Lottery Fund/
National
Heritage
Memorial Fund
(£)

2015–16 Baird Phonovision disc
and ephemera

The University of Glasgow

2015–16 An East View of the Great
Cataract of Niagara
by Captain Thomas Davies

The National Army Museum

2015–16 Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze
strip brooch

The Ashmolean Museum

10,152

2015–16 Large bowl by Hans Coper

The Victoria and Albert
Museum

92,291

2015–16 St Luke Drawing the Virgin and
Child from the workshop of Dieric
Bouts the Elder

The Bowes Museum

2015–16 A Pair of Charles II Silver Andirons

The National Museum Wales

2015–16 A pair of Italian pietre dure
mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets

The Fitzwilliam Museum

2015–16 Arab Jambiya dagger and scabbard
owned by TE Lawrence

The National Army Museum

2015–16 Nonsuch Palace from the South
by Joris Hoefnagel

The Victoria and Albert
Museum

Total

Support
by The
Art Fund
(£)

Support
by V&A
Purchase
Grant Fund

78,750
151,800

50,000

50,000

3,383,320

1,835,815

260,000

649,200

341,000

150,000

1,308,000

700,000

200,000

127,000

78,400

1,200,000

500,000

250,000

7,000,513

3,505,215

910,000

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 87

Appendix I
Composition of the Advisory
Council on the Export of
Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
i)

The independent members of the Reviewing
Committee ex officio;

ii) the Departmental assessors on the Reviewing
Committee (representatives of the Department of
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS), Department for
Business, Innovation & Skills, HM Treasury, Foreign
& Commonwealth Office, HM Revenue & Customs,
Scottish Executive Department for Culture, National
Assembly for Wales Department for Culture and
Northern Ireland Department for Culture;
iii) the Directors of the English and Scottish national
collections and National Museum Wales, and
the Librarians of the National Libraries of Wales
and Scotland;
iv) the expert advisers to DCMS, to whom applications
for export licences are referred, other than those
who are members by virtue of iii) above;
v) eight representatives of non-grant-aided museums
and galleries in England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, nominated by the Museums
Association;
vi) representatives of: Arts Council England; Arts
Council of Northern Ireland; Arts Council of Wales;
Association of Independent Museums; Conference
of Directors of the National Museums and Galleries;
Friends of the National Libraries; Heritage Lottery
Fund; The National Archives; National Archives
of Scotland; the Art Fund; National Fund for
Acquisitions; National Heritage Memorial Fund;
National Trust; National Trust for Scotland; Pilgrim
Trust; ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund; the PRISM
Grant Fund for the Preservation of Scientific and
Industrial Material;

88 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

vii) representatives of: British Academy; British Records
Association; Canadian Cultural Property Export
Review Board (observer status); Chartered Institute
of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP);
Council for British Archaeology; Historic Houses
Association; Historical Manuscripts Commission;
Royal Academy of Arts; Royal Historical Society;
Royal Scottish Academy; Scottish Records
Association; Society of Antiquaries of London;
Society of Archivists; Society of College,
National and University Libraries;
viii) representatives of the trade nominated by the:
Antiquarian Booksellers Association (two);
Antiquities Dealers Association (two); Association
of Art and Antique Dealers (two); Bonhams; British
Antique Dealers Association (three); British Art
Market Federation; British Numismatic Trade
Association (two); Christie’s; Fine Art Trade Guild;
Society of London Art Dealers (two); Society of
Fine Art Auctioneers and Valuers; Sotheby’s.

Appendix J

Appendix K

Further reading

Membership of the Working Party
on Manuscripts, Documents and
Archives during 2015–16

The Export of Works of Art etc: Report of a Committee
appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer
(HMSO, 1952)
Export Licensing for Cultural Goods: Procedures and
Guidance for Exporters of Works of Art and other
Cultural Goods (Arts Council England, 2011)
Export Control Act 2002 (HMSO)
The Export of Objects of Cultural Interest (Control)
Order 2003 (SI 2003 No. 2759)
Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December
2008 on the export of cultural goods
Export Controls on Objects of Cultural Interest: Statutory
guidance on the criteria to be taken into consideration
when making a decision about whether or not to grant
an export licence (DCMS, November 2005)
Quinquennial Review of the Reviewing Committee on
the Export of Works of Art (DCMS, December 2003)
Response to the Quinquennial Review of the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of Art (DCMS,
December 2004)
Goodison Review – Securing the Best for our Museums:
Private Giving and Government Support (HM Treasury,
January 2004)
Dealing in Cultural Objects (Offences) Act 2003 (HMSO)
Combating Illicit Trade: Due diligence guidelines for
museums, libraries and archives on collecting and
borrowing cultural material (DCMS, October 2005)
Contracting Out (Functions in Relation to Cultural
Objects) Order 2005 – Statutory Instrument 2005
No. 1103
Saved! 100 Years of the National Art Collections Fund
(Richard Verdi, Scala Publishers Ltd, 1999)

Peter Barber, Chair
Chloe Bent, Secretary, Working Party on Manuscripts,
Documents and Archives/Cultural Property Officer,
Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council
England
Julia Brettell, ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
Paula Brikci, PRISM Grant Fund Manager, Acquisitions,
Exports, Loans and Collections Unit, Arts Council
England
Mark Caldon, Cultural Property Unit, Department of
Culture, Media and Sport
Peter Durrant, Former County Archivist, Berkshire
Record Office
Chris Fletcher, Keeper of Special Collections, Bodleian
Libraries, Fellow, Exeter College
Scott Furlong, Director, Acquisitions, Exports, Loans and
Collections Unit, Arts Council England
Matthew Haley, Bonhams
Brian Lake, Antiquarian Booksellers Association
Scot McKendrick, British Library
James Morrison, Export Licensing Manager, Collections
and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
Margaret O’Sullivan, Former County Archivist,
Derbyshire Record Office
Fiona Talbott, Head of Museums, Libraries and Archives,
Heritage Lottery Fund
Anastasia Tennant, Senior Policy Adviser, Collections and
Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
James Travers, The National Archives
John Wilson, John Wilson Manuscripts Limited/
Antiquarian Booksellers Association
Joan Winterkorn, Archive and Manuscript Consultant,
Former Director and Head of Valuations at Bernard
Quaritch (Observer)

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16 89

Appendix L
Full list of plates
Plate 1
Vue sur L’Estaque et le Château d’If by Paul Cézanne
Plate 2	Baird Phonovision disc and ephemera
Plate 3
An East View of the Great Cataract of Niagara, by Captain Thomas Davies
Plate 4
Portrait of Catrina Hooghsaet, Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn
Plate 5
Anglo-Saxon gilt-bronze strip brooch
Plate 6
Large bowl by Hans Coper
Plate 7	St Luke Drawing the Virgin and Child from the workshop of Dieric Bouts the Elder
Plate 8
Nobel Prize Medal and Citation awarded to Hans Krebs
Plate 9
Portrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap by Pontormo 
Plate 10 A Pair of Charles II Silver Andirons 
Plate 11 A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets 
Plate 12 Portrait of a Boy by Ferdinand Bol 
Plate 13 Arab Jambiya dagger and scabbard owned by TE Lawrence 
Plate 14 Arab robes owned by TE Lawrence 
Plate 15 Femme, a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti 
Plate 16 Nonsuch Palace from the South by Joris Hoefnagel 
Plate 17	Medieval King Robert the Bruce of Scotland and Dunfermline Abbey Cokete Seal Matrix Pair 
Plate 18 Venice Triumphant, a drawing by Paolo Veronese 
Plate 19 A pair of pietre dure table tops 
Plate 20 A set of nine portraits of the Smythe Family by Cornelius Ketel 
Plate 21 An Italian pietre dure table top with the arms of the Grimani Family 
Cover image: A pair of Italian pietre dure mounted, inlaid ebony cabinets

90 Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2015–16

19
21
23
24
27
29
33
34
36
41
42
45
46
49
51
52
55
57
59
61
62

