26 April 2017
ELIZABETH THE SECOND by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and of Our other Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the
Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith:
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING!
WHEREAS matters relating to the skills, life-chances and community involvement of young
people in England are the concern of Departments of Our Government:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented to Us that the National Citizen Service Trust was
incorporated as a community interest company under the Companies Act 2006 in accordance
with the requirements of the Companies (Audit, Investigations and Community Enterprise)
Act 2004 in the year of Our Lord 2012 (hereinafter called the “Community Interest
Company”):
AND WHEREAS the Community Interest Company has amongst its objects creating a new
national institution to bring young people in England from all backgrounds together,
enhancing their life-chances by helping them to learn new skills and supporting them to
engage in communities in order to enrich civic society:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented unto Us that for the purpose of carrying out the said
object it is expedient that the Community Interest Company should be incorporated under a
Charter:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented to Us that it is desirable to provide volunteering
opportunities to young people in England who would not otherwise have access to such
opportunities:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented to Us that it is desirable to take steps to overcome
any barriers to participating in volunteering opportunities which young people may face as a
result of their background or circumstances:
AND WHEREAS it has been represented to Us that it is desirable that other organisations
supporting young people should benefit from the actions of the Community Interest Company
and its successor body:
AND WHEREAS We having taken the said representations into Our Royal Consideration are
minded to grant a Charter containing such provisions as seem to Us right and suitable:
NOW KNOW YE THAT WE, by virtue of Our Prerogative Royal and of Our especial grace,
certain knowledge and mere motion have willed and ordained and by these Presents for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors will and ordain as follows:

1. Incorporation
A body corporate called the National Citizen Service Trust (“the NCS Trust”) is
established.

2. Term of Charter
1. Article 4 (membership) (save for article 4.1.b) and article 5 (appointment of the
non-executive members) take effect on the day following the date this Charter is
sealed.
2. The remainder of this Charter takes effect on the day after the date by which the
chair and at least eight other non-executive members of the NCS Trust have been
appointed, and the NCS Trust is duly established on that day.
3. This Charter is to continue to have effect unless and until it is revoked by Us, Our
Heirs and Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy Council.
3. Functions of the NCS Trust
1. The primary functions of the NCS Trust, to be exercised in accordance with the
terms of this Charter, area. to provide or arrange for the provision of programmes for young people in
England with the purpose ofi. enabling participants from different backgrounds to work together
in local communities to participate in projects to benefit society,
and
ii. enhancing communication, leadership and team-working skills of
participants, and
b. to promote the programmes toi. young people in England,
ii. parents and carers of young people in England,
iii. schools and other educational bodies, and
iv. local authorities and other public bodies.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1a. “young people in England” means 16 and 17 year olds, but
b. the NCS Trust may, from time to time, determine that “young people” also
includes one or more of the followingi. 15 year olds;
ii. any person who has attained the age of 18 and is under the age of
25;
iii. any person of a particular age falling within the range described in
sub-paragraph ii.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, young people are “in England” if they are
resident in England, or receive education or training there.
4. In exercising its primary functions, the objectives of the NCS Trust are-

a. to promote social cohesion through social integration, by ensuring equality
of access to the programmes by participants regardless of their background
or circumstances, and
b. to seek to expand the number of participants.
5. In exercising its primary functions, the NCS Trust musta. treat the need to safeguard and promote the wellbeing of participants as the
paramount consideration, and
b. have regard to the desirability ofi. promoting social mobility,
ii. promoting the personal and social development of participants,
iii. promoting the employment prospects of participants by equipping
them with relevant practical skills,
iv. encouraging participants to take an interest in debate on matters of
local or national political interest, and promoting their
understanding of how to participate in national and local elections,
and
v. ensuring value for money.
4. Membership
1.

2.

The NCS Trust is to consist ofa. the chair (see article 5),
b. the chief executive (see article 6), and
c. at least 8, but not more than 10, other members (see article 5).
The chair and the members within paragraph 1.c are referred to in this Charter as the
“non-executive members”.

5. Appointment of the non-executive members
1.

The chair will be appointed, for a term not exceeding three years, by Us, Our Heirs
and Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy Council and on a
recommendation from Our Prime Minister.

2.

Before making the recommendation Our Prime Minister must conduct a fair, open
and merit-based competition.

3.

The non-executive members within article 4.1.c will be appointed, for a term not
exceeding three years, by Us, Our Heirs and Successors in Councila. on the advice of the Privy Council, and
b. on a recommendation from Our Prime Minister	  following the process described
in paragraph 4.

4.

The chair must make recommendations on appointments to Our Prime Minister
following a fair, open and merit-based competition. The chair should provide Our
Prime Minister with a choice of appointable candidates whose skills, experience and
qualities meet the needs, as determined by Our Secretary of State and the chair, of the
role. The competition process must be approved by Our Secretary of State.
Recommendations on appointments made by the chair must specify the
recommended term of the appointment.

5.

The procedure for re-appointment of non-executive members is the same as for
appointment.

6.

A person may be re-appointed as a non-executive member once only.

7.

An employee of the NCS Trust may not be appointed as a non-executive member,
and a non-executive member who becomes an employee ceases to be a non-executive
member.

8.

A competition conducted under this article must comply with the Governance Code
for Public Appointments which is published under the Public Appointments Order in
Council for the time being in force.

6. Chief executive
1.

There is to be an employee of the NCS Trust known as the chief executive.

2.

Before making an appointment of a person as the chief executive, the NCS Trust
must establish a nominations committee consisting of at least three non-executive
members, one of whom must be made chair of the committee.

3.

The purpose of the nominations committee is to make recommendations to the NCS
Trust about the appointment of the chief executive.

4.

Before making recommendations under this article, the nominations committee must
conduct a fair, open and merit-based competition.

5.

Paragraphs 2 to 4 are subject to any provision about the appointment of the first chief
executive made by a scheme under Schedule 1 to the National Citizen Service Act
2017 (transfer of staff etc from the NCS Trust Community Interest Company).

7. Termination of appointments: non-executive members
1.

A non-executive member of the NCS Trust may resign by giving written notice to
Our Secretary of State.

2.

Our Secretary of State may terminate the appointment of a non-executive member of
the NCS Trust by giving the member written notice ifa.
b.

3.

the member has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the NCS Trust
without permission from the NCS Trust, or
the member is unable, unfit or unwilling to carry out the member’s functions.

Before terminating an appointment of a non-executive member (other than the chair)
under paragraph 2, Our Secretary of State must consult the chair.

8. The remuneration committee and remuneration policy
1.

The NCS Trust must establish a remuneration committee under article 12, consisting
ofa. a representative of Our Government, and
b. at least three non-executive members,
and make one member of the committee its chair.

2.

It is the function of the remuneration committee toa. make recommendations to the NCS Trust about its remuneration policy (but not
about individual pay decisions), and
b. determine whether or not to approve a remuneration policy prepared by the NCS
Trust and submitted by it to the committee for approval.

3.

Where the NCS Trust submits a remuneration policy to the remuneration committee
for approvala. a simple majority of the members of the committee present and entitled to vote is
required to approve the policy, but
b. the policy is not approved unless the representative of Our Government votes to
approve the policy.
In the event of a tie, the representative of Our Government has a casting vote.

4.

The representative of Our Government is to be appointed by Our Secretary of State
in consultation with the chair of the NCS Trust.

9. The audit and risk committee
1. The NCS Trust must establish an audit and risk committee under article 12, consisting
ofa. a representative of Our Government, and
b. at least three non-executive members,
and make one member of the committee its chair.

2. It is the function of the audit and risk committee toa. develop and review the principles and standards to be applied in reviewing the
financial and other management functions of the NCS Trust, and
b. make recommendations to the NCS Trust about the exercise of those functions.
3. The representative of Our Government is to be appointed by Our Secretary of State in
consultation with the chair of the NCS Trust.
10. Pay: non-executive members
1.

The NCS Trust may pay its non-executive members such remuneration as it decides.

2.

The NCS Trust may pay, or provide for the payment of, such allowances or gratuities
as it decides, to a person who is or has been a non-executive member.

3.

Decisions under paragraphs 1 and 2 must be made in accordance with a remuneration
policy prepared by the NCS Trust and approved by the remuneration committee.

4.

A decision to pay an individual the same or more than Our Prime Minister cannot be
made without the approval of Our Chief Secretary to Our Treasury.

5.

As soon as reasonably practicable after the end of each financial year, the NCS Trust
musta. publish the amount of remuneration, if any, paid under paragraph 1 in respect of
each non-executive member for that year (without identifying the member to
which any particular amount relates), and
b. publish the total amount of payments made under paragraph 2 for that year.

11. Pay: employees
1.

The NCS Trust may pay its employees such remuneration as it decides.

2.

The NCS Trust may pay, or provide for the payment of, such pensions, allowances or
gratuities as it decides, to or in respect of a person who is or has been an employee of
the NCS Trust.

3.

Decisions under paragraphs 1 and 2 must be made in accordance with a remuneration
policy prepared by the NCS Trust and approved by the remuneration committee.

4.

A decision to pay an individual the same or more than Our Prime Minister cannot be
made without the approval of Our Chief Secretary to Our Treasury.

12. Committees and sub-committees
1.

The NCS Trust may establish committees of the NCS Trust, and those committees
may establish sub-committees.

2.

The NCS Trust may establish a committee jointly with any other person, but those
committees may not establish sub-committees.

3.

Subject to article 8 (remuneration committee) and article 9 (audit and risk
committee), the number, remit and composition of a committee or sub-committee
established under paragraph 1 or 2 are a matter for the NCS Trust but each committee
or sub-committee must include at least one member or employee of the NCS Trust.

4.

5.

The NCS Trust may arrange for the payment of remuneration, allowances and
expenses to any person whoa. is a member of a committee or sub-committee established under this article, but
b. is not a member or employee of the NCS Trust.
Decisions under paragraph 4 must be made in accordance with a remuneration policy
prepared by the NCS Trust and approved by the remuneration committee.

13. Delegation
1.

The NCS Trust may delegate any of its functions, on such terms and conditions as it
thinks fit, toa. an employee of the NCS Trust, or
b. a committee established by it.

2.

Subject to paragraph 3, a committee may delegate any of its functions to a subcommittee, on such terms and conditions as the NCS Trust thinks fit.

3.

Paragraph 2 does not apply to a committee established under article 8 (remuneration
committee) or article 9 (audit and risk committee).

14. Procedure
1.

2.

3.

The NCS Trust may regulate its own proceedings (including quorum), and the
procedure (including quorum) of any committees or sub-committees.
The validity of proceedings of the NCS Trust, or of any committee or sub-committee,
is not affected bya. a vacancy, or
b. a defective appointment.
This article is subject to article 8 (remuneration committee) and article 16 (charter
amendment).

15. Powers
1.

Subject to paragraph 3, the NCS Trust may do anything calculated to facilitate, or
incidental or conducive to, the carrying out of any of its functions.

2.

In particular, the NCS Trust maya.
enter into agreements;
b.
acquire or dispose of land or other property;
c.
invest money;
d.
accept gifts of money, land or other property and apply it, or hold and
administer it on trust, for the purposes of carrying out any of its functions.

3.

The NCS Trust may not borrow money.

16. Charter Amendment
1.

Any provision of this Charter may be added to, supplemented, varied or omitted (in
whole or in part) by Us, Our Heirs or Successors in Council, on the advice of the
Privy Council, upon such terms as We consider fit, subject to the requirement that the
effect of a change is, where relevant, in accordance with the National Citizen Service
Act 2017.

2.

The NCS Trust may propose to add, supplement, vary or omit (in whole or part) a
provision of this Charter (“a proposal for change”), subject toa.
b.

the requirement in paragraph 1, and
the restrictions in paragraphs 3 and 4.

3.

The NCS Trust may not make a proposal for change in relation to the following
provisions of this Charter: article 1 (incorporation), article 2 (term of Charter), this
article (Charter amendment) and article 19 (legal nature of the NCS Trust).

4.

The NCS Trust may not make a proposal for change unless a resolution is passed in
favour of the proposal by a majority of not less than three-quarters of the members
present and entitled to vote at a meeting duly convened for that purpose. The threequarters majority must also represent a simple majority of the total number of
members of the NCS Trust.

5.

A proposal for change by the NCS Trust is subject to approval by Us, Our Heirs or
Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy Council.

6.

A change, whether initiated under paragraph 1 or proposed by the NCS Trust,
becomes effective when approved by Us, Our Heirs or Successors in Council, on the
advice of the Privy Council.

17. Surrender and winding up etc.
1. Subject to paragraphs 2 and 3, the NCS Trust may propose to surrender this
Charter and wind up or otherwise deal with the affairs of the NCS Trust in such a
manner as the NCS Trust considers fit, provided that all remaining funds (which
remain once the debts of the NCS Trust have been paid in full) together with the
proceeds from the sale of any assets belonging to the NCS Trust are to be paid to
the Consolidated Fund.
2. A proposal to surrender this Charter and wind up or otherwise deal with the affairs
of the NCS Trust may not be made unless a resolution is passed in favour of the
proposal by a majority of not less than three-quarters of the members of the NCS
Trust present and entitled to vote at a meeting duly convened for that purpose. The
three-quarters majority must also represent a simple majority of the total number
of members of the NCS Trust.
3. A proposal by the NCS Trust under this article is subject to approval by Us, Our
Heirs or Successors in Council, on the advice of the Privy Council and upon such
terms as We consider fit.

18. General
1.

The NCS Trust has perpetual succession, and continues to exist as a legal person,
regardless of the changes in its composition which occur when particular individuals
cease to be members and are succeeded by other individuals.

2.

The NCS Trust has the capacity and powers of a natural person, and in particular, has
the capacity to sue and be sued.

3.

However the NCS Trust may use these general powers only for the purposes of the
other functions set out in this Charter, or the functions conferred by or under the
National Citizen Service Act 2017 or any other Act.

19. Legal nature of the NCS Trust
The word “trust” is used in the name of the NCS Trust in a colloquial sense, to suggest a
body which discharges a public trust in the exercise of a service to the public. The word is
not used in its technical legal sense, and it is not intended to imply that members of the
Trust are to be treated as trustees of property or to be subject to the law relating to trusts
or trustees.

20. Status
1.

Neither the NCS Trust nor any of its members or employees is to be regarded as the
servant or agent of the Crown, or as enjoying any status, immunity or privilege of the
Crown.

2.

The NCS Trust’s property is not to be regarded as property of, or held on behalf of,
the Crown.

IN WITNESS whereof…..

