Report under the Public Libraries and
Museums Act 1964 for 2016
A Report presented to Parliament
pursuant to Section 17 of the Public
Libraries and Museums Act 1964

February 2017

1

We can also provide documents to meet the specific requirements for people with
disabilities.
Please email enquiries@culture.gov.uk
Department for Culture, Media & Sport
Printed in the UK on recycled paper
©Crown copyright 2017
You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium,
under the terms of the Open Government Licence.
To view this licence, visit ​http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
or e-mail: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this document should be sent to us at
enquiries@culture.gov.uk
This document is also available from our website at ​www.gov.uk/dcms

2

FOREWORD
I was delighted, in July 2016, to take on responsibility for libraries policy in England. There
are a number of synergies between my Civil Society work and what public libraries are trying
to achieve, including in helping to improve people’s lives and supporting a society that works
for everyone. ​Libraries should therefore be recognised for the value they add in achieving
important outcomes for individuals and communities.
Like many sectors, the library service faces challenges, and the way people use libraries and
their expectations of public services are changing. ​I want libraries to be more resilient and
better equipped to weather these challenges - to thrive, not just survive. ​Standing still is not
an option. Many local authorities have been developing their library service provision to meet
local needs and we want to support these. Furthermore there have been significant
contributions from the Government and other key stakeholders to develop the sector.
In 2016 we saw the roll out of the Arts Council managed wifi programme across libraries in
England. 99.3% of all static public libraries in England are now able to provide access to
free, good quality wifi. This ensures libraries remain a vital and well-used service at the
centre of the community for all members of society.
In addition, the Libraries Taskforce published ​Libraries Deliver: Ambition for Public Libraries
in England 2016 to 2021​ ​on 1 December 2016 - this highlights the importance the
Government attaches to the public library service. The Taskforce’s most recent progress
report​ focuses on the process of drawing up the strategy document, and the articulation of
the 7 Outcomes that public libraries in England contribute to,
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

cultural and creative enrichment
increased reading and literacy
increased digital access and literacy
helping everyone achieve their full potential
healthier and happier lives
greater prosperity
stronger, more resilient communities.

A number of local authorities continue to review their library service provision and it is
essential that they are mindful of their duty to provide a comprehensive and efficient service.
The Ambition document highlights a range of practical and innovative options they can
explore to maintain and transform library services, including the potential to consider other
library delivery models such as public service mutuals. We would like to see local authorities
working with Government and their local communities to consider these options, and seek to
ensure library services are sustainable for the long term, before they decide to make
significant changes to their library services.
The Government believes that public libraries are a valuable resource for all members of the
public. They are an important part of every community; entertaining and educating, acting as
meeting places and are an important source of information.
There remains a strong library service in England, with the Chartered Institute of Public
Finance and Accountancy annual library statistics indicating there were 3,036 libraries and
3

total net expenditure of £701 million invested by local authorities in 2015/16. Libraries are
still popular and there are a large number of visits each year. In 2015/16 alone there were
177 million book loans and 211 million visits to libraries in England - more than the total
attendance at English Premier League football matches, cinema admissions in England and
the top 10 UK tourist attractions combined.
These are challenging times for councils and the library services they run. The way people
use libraries and their expectations of public services are changing. Councils have to make
important decisions about resource allocation, to meet local needs and also legal
requirements and these decisions should be based on robust evidence. Councils should be
gathering evidence about local needs, then actively discussing options to meet these with
the community and library professionals. Complaints that councils do not appear to be
meeting their statutory duties will be carefully considered and where needed action under the
1964 Act will be taken. However the Government would prefer to work with councils and
support them to deliver strong library services for their communities.
The following detail in this Report provides information on developments in the library sector
during 2016 that were undertaken by Government and a number of library stakeholders.
Rob Wilson MP - Minister for Civil Society
Government Engagement in Libraries
Departmental Ministers have undertaken a number of visits to libraries in the last 12 months.
The previous Minister for Culture and Digital Economy participated in National Libraries Day
by visiting Askew Road Library in Hammersmith and Fulham, and he attended the launch of
the Summer Reading Challenge at the House of Illustration in Camden. He also visited
Battersea Library for the launch of the Lloyds Banking Group and Halifax Community Bank
scheme designed to match local branch staff with libraries to deliver basic digital skills
training to adults in the UK. T​he previous Minister for Intellectual Property, Baroness
Neville-Rolfe, visited Northcote Library in Battersea to help Wandsworth Libraries celebrate
National Libraries Day.
Prior to her appointment the current Secretary of State formally opened, in May 2016, the
Werrington Library and Wellbeing Centre, Staffordshire.
Since assuming responsibility for libraries policy the Minister for Civil Society visited a
number of libraries in 2016 including Wokingham library, Bicester library, Farnham Common
library, the Curve in Slough and Kent Library and History Centre. He has met with a number
of library sector stakeholders including Paul Blantern, Chair of the Libraries Taskforce;
Councillor Ian Stephens, Chair of the Local Government Association (LGA) Culture, Tourism
and Sport Board; Neil MacInnes, President of the Society of Chief Librarians (SCL), Nick
Poole, Chief Executive, Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP);
Darren Henley, Chief Executive and Brian Ashley, Director Libraries, Arts Council England
(the Arts Council); Helen Milner, Chief Executive Officer, Tinder Foundation (now renamed
the Good Things Foundation); Lord Bird; Councillor Mary Martin, Swindon Borough Council,
and Justin Tomlinson MP; as well as library campaign representatives.

4

DCMS officials have also continued to meet regularly with public library sector partners and
those with an interest in public libraries including the Arts Council, SCL, LGA, CILIP and The
Reading Agency.
Public Libraries and Museum Act 1964 (1964 Act)
The 1964 Act places a duty on local authorities to provide a comprehensive and efficient
library service. Public libraries are funded and run by local authorities and they remain best
placed to assess the needs of their local communities and design library services to meet
these needs, within the requirements of their statutory duty to deliver a comprehensive and
efficient library service. The 1964 Act also places a duty on the Secretary of State for
Culture, Media and Sport to superintend and promote the improvement of the public library
service provided by local authorities in England and to secure the proper discharge of the
statutory duties on local authorities. Under the 1964 Act the Secretary of State has the power
to make a remedial order against a library authority following a local inquiry. A local inquiry
can be commenced either on receipt of a complaint or of the Secretary of State’s own
motion. In determining whether to order an inquiry the Secretary of State carefully considers
the relevant facts on a case-by-case basis.
DCMS officials continue to monitor and keep under review local authority proposals to
change their library service provision and provide advice to the Secretary of State
accordingly. Over the period of this report Ministers have issued a ‘minded to’ and final
decision letter to Harrow Council confirming that the Secretary of State had decided not to
direct a local inquiry into their library service provision and have written to both Lambeth
Council and Lancashire County Council to confirm that the Department is treating
representations received as formal complaints.
Changes to library service provision in 2016 have included the establishment of a public
sector mutual to manage the library service in Devon, new and refurbished libraries,
communities and other local groups supporting or taking over the running of libraries. Data
about local library service provision has been collected by the Libraries Taskforce in
consultation with local authorities and is to be made publically available.
Public Libraries Developments
Local authorities continue to invest in their library service and this has included the
development of new libraries and the refurbishment of others across England to provide
modern and updated services and facilities - some examples include:
● Southam Library (Warwickshire) has been built on Tithe Place and opened in January
2016. ​It was formally opened by local MP and Attorney General Jeremy Wright, on 19
February 2016. I​t is in the same location as the former library and was part of a £12.4
million project which also included 75 retirement apartments and a neighbourhood
police office. It offers more computers and versatile space inside for adults and
children, reading groups and others who would like to use it.
● The Arcadia Library and Leisure Centre, (Manchester) - a brand new combined library
and leisure centre in Levenshulme opened on 20 February 2016. The library is open
90 hours per week through the use of RFID, self service PCs and printing, supervised
5

by the leisure team with dedicated library staff presence for 30 hours a week. It is an
integral part of the Centre with access to a wide range of library services and a suite
of PCs as well as free wifi, an attractive children's library, comfortable seating areas
and study spaces with a wide range of books for all ages. Use of the library has risen
dramatically with the seven day offer and a joint programme is being developed to
ensure healthy minds and bodies are promoted at Arcadia.
● Marcus Garvey Library (Haringey) reopened on 28 June 2016 as The Marcus Garvey
Centre - Library and Customer Services.The new-look library boasts a more spacious
layout, modern furniture, more computers and 22,000 new books. Customer service
facilities have been introduced on the second floor with an enquiry desk and payment
machines for services such as parking fines. There is also a brand new study area
and a dedicated Afro Caribbean and Marcus Garvey section.
● Bicester library (Oxfordshire) was built as part of a multimillion-pound regeneration of
the town centre. It started operating in April 2016 and was officially opened on 4 July
2016, attracting over 1,000 new members between those two dates. The site is
shared with a hotel and local council services, as well as offices and retail units.
● Woolston Library (Southampton) is a new library that opened on 8 August 2016 and is
part of the £500 million plans to redevelop the former Vosper Thornycroft site which
will eventually see 1,600 homes built there. The new library features computers for
community use and will host learning sessions for people to increase digital skills. The
number of books available has increased while there will be full disabled access,
including accessible toilets.
● The Curve (Slough) library and cultural centre opened on 2 September 2016. This is a
£22 million replacement for the library that previously served the area. Its innovative
design brings together the latest library services including study areas, wifi, computer
and internet access as well as thousands of books, audio books, CDs and DVDs,
alongside other community uses such as community learning, cultural activities and
events, performance space, and exhibitions.
● The Word, “National Centre for the Written Word” (South Tyneside) opened on 22
October 2016. It is a new state-of-the-art cultural venue and is the jewel in the crown
of the £100 million regeneration of South Shields town centre. The three-storey
circular cultural centre overlooks the town’s refurbished Market Place and
incorporates a library which boasts over 70,000 books, and digital media space. It
also boasts an impressive range of facilities including exhibition space, a computer
gaming area, a FabLab with 3D printers and vinyl and laser cutters, digitised archives,
meeting rooms, children's immersive storytelling area, OpenZone IT suite, café and a
rooftop space and terrace providing stunning views over the river. It won 'Best
Regeneration or Restoration' at the Living North Awards.
● Kent Elms Library (Southend) The refurbishment, completed on 7 November 2016,
has created a fresh new welcoming area for customers as well as changes to the
entrance to provide better access for those with mobility needs and pushchairs.
● Dartford Library (Kent) re-opened on 14 November 2016 following a £650,000
6

refurbishment. The guiding principle of the restoration was to ensure that the building
maintained its heritage. Walls and flooring were redecorated, new furniture installed,
and original listed bookshelves have been refurbished.
Libraries Taskforce
The ​Leadership for Libraries Taskforce​ was set up by DCMS and the Local Government
Association (LGA) in March 2015 in response to recommendations from the ​Independent
Library Report​. ​Its role is to enable the delivery of the recommendations from the
Independent Library Report and to build upon, and add value to existing good practice,
partnerships and other activities that are already supporting public libraries. It also promotes
libraries to national and local government and to potential funders, and seeks to create a
strong and coherent narrative around the contribution public libraries make to society and to
local communities.
The Taskforce reports to Ministers via the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS)
and the Local Government Association (LGA).​ It published its ​second six month progress
report on 13 April 2016​ and ​third on 1 December 2016.​ These highlighted the key
achievements from October 2015 to March 2016 and April to September 2016 respectively
and its future action plans.
Libraries Deliver: Ambition for Public Libraries in England 2016 to 2021
The first of the Taskforce’s ​six monthly reports​ in 2015 recommended that there should be a
document produced that set out the government's and the Taskforce's shared vision for
public libraries in England. This year has seen the Taskforce develop ​Libraries Deliver:
Ambition for public libraries in England 2016 to 2021​. Its publication on 1 December 2016
followed an extensive ​period of consultation​ (23 March - 3 June 2016) that included an
online questionnaire and the hosting of 13 regional workshops across England.
Taskforce priorities for 2016/17​:
Following publication of the ‘Libraries Deliver: Ambition’ document, the Taskforce priorities,
outlined in its Action Plan, are:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Making the case for investment in libraries
Raising public awareness of what libraries have to offer
Identifying and showcasing good practice and supporting innovation
Supporting workforce development
Supporting development of the digital offer of libraries
Monitoring and reporting on progress

Taskforce data collection exercise
In consultation with the local authority library services in England, the Taskforce undertook
the first phase of a data collection exercise to understand the totality of static library service
provision in each local authority area​.
The data will be available as an open data set and it is expected that it will be used by
7

Taskforce organisations as a definitive source to which enquiries can be directed. The
Taskforce intend to build upon this initial data to develop a core data set that councils can
then use to help make strategic decisions, demonstrate the impact of libraries, meet user
needs better, and improve day-to-day operation.
Wifi in Public Libraries in England
£2.6 million was awarded to 68 local authorities in October 2015 to enable new installations
in libraries without wifi and enable authorities which already have wifi to upgrade it to an
agreed technical standard. The programme was successfully managed by the Arts Council
and on completion in April 2016 ​1,019 libraries in England had benefited, resulting in 99.3%
of static public libraries providing free wifi access.
Opportunities for Everyone
DCMS and the Taskforce have set up a £4 million ​Libraries: Opportunities for Everyone
innovation fund​, which is being managed by the Arts Council, to pilot library service projects
that provide people with opportunities which they might not have otherwise. These pilots will
help demonstrate which approaches are most successful, hopefully leading to wider
adoption and investment in them.
Community Libraries
Councils are increasingly looking at different ways to provide library services, and to ensure
that any delivery model they choose is sustainable and effective for the long-term. The
Libraries Taskforce wants​ to ensure that a strong evidence base on the different delivery
models is available to inform local authority decision making.
The Taskforce has already published a ​Community libraries: best practice toolkit​ to provide
information that will be helpful for ​communities and heads of library services in establishing
community libraries, so everyone involved can make informed decisions about the pros and
cons of using this model, learning from others who have gone before. ​To further build the
evidence base on community-managed libraries, the Taskforce and the Department for
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) commissioned ​SERIO​, an applied research unit at
Plymouth University, to conduct a national research project to understand more about how
community-managed libraries operate, and what lessons or examples can be learnt and
shared about their effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability.
The research will be completed by the end of March 2017. The report will be published on
GOV.UK and will include proposals for additions and improvements that can made to the
Community libraries toolkit​.
Sharing experiences and learning is particularly important for community managed libraries,
where resources are often limited and volunteers may have limited knowledge on
establishing and running a library. Supported financially by ​The Power to Change Trust​, the
Taskforce, Society of Chief Librarians, Locality and Upper Norwood Library Trust have set
up a ​peer network​ for community managed libraries to support the sharing of good practice,
and to ensure the development of sustainable community managed library business models.

8

Public Sector Mutuals
The Government is committed to supporting the development of new governance models
within the public sector, including in particular public service mutuals. In the libraries sector,
during 2016, Devon libraries spun out to form a new public service mutual, ​Libraries
Unlimited​. The Ambition document announced that, during 2016/17, DCMS would provide
dedicated support for library services to explore and, where it is right for them, spin out into a
public service mutual model. It will build on the experience of trailblazing public libraries
mutuals, and previous government support programmes.
The Government has launched an Interim Mutuals Support Fund to support public sector
organisations to spin out and existing public service mutuals. The fund underpins our
ambitions to grow the Public Sector Mutuals sector, and help put libraries on a more
sustainable footing. ​In addition the Government has launched the provision of Peer Support
for library authorities to explore the mutual model. This Peer Support is being provided by
Optimo, a consortium comprising of Y​ork Explore, Libraries Unlimited, Suffolk Libraries,
Inspire in Nottinghamshire and Mutual Ventures.
Longer term, in addition to continuing support as part of a wider government programme
supporting mutuals, DCMS will also discuss with the sector the benefits of establishing a
more permanent body at national level to support public sector mutuals across all sectors to
assist shifts to new ways of working; for example, franchising support services to enable
economies of scale and speedier spin-out.
E-book Lending
The Conservative Party Manifesto 2015 included the commitment that the Government
would work with public libraries “to ensure remote access to e-books, without charge and
with appropriate compensation for authors that enhances the Public Lending Right [PLR]
scheme”. Libraries are increasingly providing remote e-book lending (in 2015/16 over 3
million e-book loans were made) so readers have the opportunity to borrow e-books as well
as physical and audio books. The Department has been looking at options for how to
implement the manifesto commitment and compensate authors appropriately for remote
e-lending, including by extending the PLR to include remote loans of e-books. In doing so,
we have engaged with representatives of authors, libraries, agents, publishers and
booksellers as well as the Public Lending Right Office.
The Minister for Digital and Culture confirmed at the Report stage of the Digital Economy Bill
in the House of Commons on 28 November 2016 that the Government intends to legislate as
soon as possible to extend PLR to include the remote lending of e-books. A Government
amendment was tabled at Report stage of the Digital Economy Bill in the House of Lords.
Public Lending Right (PLR) Scheme - Rate per Loan
Following a recommendation from the British Library which delivers the Public Lending Right
Scheme and a public consultation towards the​ ​end of 2015, the payment rate for each loan
was increased in February 2016 from 6.66 pence to 7.67 pence.
The PLR Advisory Committee and British Library Board, has since recommended to
9

Government a further increase in the Rate Per Loan for payments from February 2017. The
recommendation was subject to a consultation, which closed on 25 November. The
consultation responses were considered and the revised Rate Per Loan was implemented in
February 2017 by way of a Statutory Instrument.
Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) comparative profile
library reports
For the fourth consecutive year, DCMS provided the funding for CIPFA set of benchmark
reports for all Library Authorities in England for 2014/15 at a cost of £48,222. The reports
compare a local authority’s library service to a group of comparable authorities, known as
their “nearest neighbours”, to allow them to compare like-with-like and pinpoint areas where
they could improve performance. These reports are publically available from the CIPFA
website.
Work undertaken by library sector stakeholders
In addition to the work undertaken by Government to support the libraries sector, the
Government also supports and works closely with a number of key library stakeholders to
assist the development and improvement of the sector. They include Arts Council England,
Society of Chief Librarians, British Library, Local Government Association and The Reading
Agency. Details of the programmes and initiatives delivered during the period of this report
are contained in the following annexes.

10

Annex A
Arts Council England (‘the Arts Council')
Arts Council England is the development agency for public libraries in England funded by
DCMS. They undertake this function by collaborating with others to advocate, invest and
develop. ​The Arts Council​ development support is framed by its strategy, ‘​Great art and
culture for everyone’ and the research project undertaken in 2012/13, ‘​Envisioning the library
of the future’. All of the activity undertaken by ACE that benefits libraries is firmly based on
the four priorities that emerged from this research:
·​
·​
·​
·​

Place the library as the hub of the community
​Make the most of digital technology and creative media
​Ensure that libraries are resilient and sustainable
​Deliver the right skills for those who work in libraries
​

The Arts Council​ ​is committed to supporting the development of the library service,

recognising the importance of safeguarding a service that is fit for purpose now and in the
future. This includes promotion of increased usage of libraries, improved engagement of
users and tackling digital exclusion.
● Arts Council Investment 2018-22
In October 2016, the Arts Council published further details about their ​investment
approach for 2018-22​. For the first time, libraries are eligible to apply for all of the Arts
Council funding programmes, wherever the proposals meet ACE published aims. This
means that, in addition to being eligible for the Arts Council open access ​Grants for
the Arts (GftA) fund​, libraries will now be able to apply for longer term investment as
National Portfolio Organisations (NPOs) for arts and museums activity, and will be
eligible for all strategic funds. The application period opened on 26 October 2016 and
decisions will be announced by the beginning of July 2017, to allow time to negotiate
the funding agreement before activity starts in April 2018.
● Grants for the arts - £6 million fund for libraries
Following the successful first phase of the fund, a second phase was launched in April
2015 with a further £6 million allocated until March 2018 - ​Grants for the Arts Libraries
fund​. Library services have undertaken projects across a variety of art forms, with
strengths emerging in art, literature and digital arts engagement and arts and cultural
activities becoming an established part of the menu of activities in libraries around the
country. From March 2016 to 24 October 2016, 24 awards were made to a total value
of £658,913.
● Libraries Development Funding - £984,000
The Arts Council​ has funded a range of development activities in the past year,
focusing closely on developing the resilience of the sector, supporting the activities of
the Leadership for Libraries Task Force and delivery of the Society of Chief Librarians
(SCL) Universal Offers. This includes:
11

● Building evidence of best practice and innovation
The Arts Council invested £300,000 in November 2016 to develop a suite of reports
that research and demonstrate best practice around libraries' contribution to a wide
range of strategic priorities: placemaking, diversity, older people, creative readership
and community hubs. These reports will strengthen libraries’ evidence base and
enable the sector to highlight excellence in existing work and support innovation
through new, targeted, pilot projects. They will also provide valuable resources to
allow library stakeholders to better make their case to policy makers, partners and
planners.
● Impact of ‘Rhyme-time’ programme on parental mental health
Shared Intelligence and Essex Libraries received a grant in November 2016 to
develop an innovative pilot project to explore the potential for library Rhyme Times to
be used as a deliberate and wide-reaching non-clinical intervention for mental health,
especially maternal mental health and post-natal. Rhyme Times are a free and
informal music and song session for babies, toddlers and their parents that runs under
various guises in the majority of English libraries. The pilot will receive £83,000
funding over two years with the project report and outcomes delivered in 2017/18.
● Delivery of Universal Offer programme
£600,000 funding is being provided to SCL over two years to support delivery of their
two year strategic development plan that includes organisational change and
developing the Universal Offers framework. The Universal Offers cover the key areas
of libraries’ work, including health, reading, digital, information and learning. The
funding will also enable the development of a sixth offer focused on culture.
● Delivery of the Universal Health Offer
In June 2016, SCL were awarded £120,000 of funding over two years to further
develop this Offer. This was supported by match funding from the Wellcome Trust.
The work includes increasing the scope, reach and sustainability of the Reading Well
Books on Prescription scheme, working with public libraries to extend and develop the
delivery of the programme and adding new evidence to strengthen the national
evidence base of impact and learning.
● Leadership for Libraries Taskforce
Funding of £100,000 was provided in 2015/16 to the Taskforce to fund the
secondment of public library staff to work on Taskforce priorities. In addition, £74,000
of funding was provided to support work in evidencing and advocating how libraries
can help deliver national and local outcomes across a wide range of policy areas and
t​o provide consultancy support for the Society of Chief Librarians in developing their
bid to become a supplier on the Government Digital Service’s Digital Training and
Support Framework.

12

Annex B
Society of Chief Librarians (SCL)
SCL is a key partner to the Government and the Leadership for Libraries Taskforce and it
continues to work in partnership with the Arts Council, The Reading Agency, the BBC and
the Wellcome Trust to develop its five Universal Offers for public libraries. Arts Council
England has provided funding of over £360K in 2016 to enable the development of the
offers. The development of the Offers is led by a member of the SCL Executive with some
project management or consultancy support.
● Universal Learning Offer
The Offer was launched at the end of 2015 and was followed by “Cracking the Code”,
a learning and showcase event for public library staff that was held in Clapham
Library in March 2016. The event was aimed at library professionals with an interest in
developing digital making services. A second event took place at Manchester Central
Library on 8 November.
Partnerships continued to develop, with the BBC on their ‘Make It Digital’ and
‘Weather Watchers’ campaigns. In 2016 the BBC distributed its micro-computer, the
Micro:bit to all year 7 students and SCL developed a set of online resources to
support libraries in delivering Micro:bit sessions.
SCL’s partnership with Code Club continued to grow and they now have more than
300 affiliated clubs being hosted by libraries.
● Access to Research
93% of library services are signed up to provide the service which allows public library
users to access licensed academic journal articles from leading publishers for free, via
public-access computers in local public libraries. Following a 2 year pilot, publishers
are prepared to extend the arrangements​ and SCL are continuing to work with the
Publishers Licensing Society to promote and develop the service.
Universal Information Offer
● Workforce Development Digital Skills Training Programme
With Arts Council funding, the Universal Information Offer working group worked with
Learning Pool to increase and update e-learning training modules, including
information on Universal Credit. The modules went live at the beginning of February
2016 and around 4,000 modules have been completed to date. A national network of
library staff monitor the content and usage to keep the modules up to date and
relevant.

13

● Assisted Digital and Digital Inclusion
SCL successfully secured a place on the Government Digital Service’s (GDS) Digital
Training and Support Services framework for the supply of Assisted Digital and Digital
Inclusion services. This allows SCL to bid on behalf of public libraries to provide
services and receive funding under the Framework.
The Libraries Taskforce and Arts Council provided funding for support from
consultants to work with SCL to consider the framework requirements in 2015/16.
ACE awarded a further £50,000 funding (as part of the overall package of funding for
the Universal Offers) in 2016/17 to enable SCL to put Memoranda of Understanding in
place with library services across ​England, Wales and Northern Ireland​, to set up
advice and guidance infrastructure for library services on delivering GDS contracts,
and to contract an external provider to supply interim bid and commercial (including
legal) management services.
● Information4living
This national platform of local and national resources for staff and public provides
postcode searchable database of links to essential information areas; covering
benefits, business, health, jobs, money, and rights and citizenship.
Library services ensure that the links to local and national information are kept up to
date and add new content. ​The initial work was commissioned through NHS funding.
A report on usage and recommendations for future evaluation, promotion, and
expanded role was completed in May 2016. A soft launch to the public took place
towards the end of 2016.
Universal Health Offer
A ​key component of this Offer is the Reading Well Books on Prescription (RWBOP) scheme
which has developed further over the last year. Through the partnership with The Reading
Agency the Health Offer combines national development with local delivery to bring new
community health interventions to local communities. The work is further supported through
other national partners namely the Wellcome Trust and the Arts Council. Developments this
year include:
● Reading Well for young people – ‘Shelf Help’
This book list was launched nationally on 12 April. It provides quality assured reading
to support the health, well-being and emotional resilience of young people. It also
includes recommendations for conditions such as anxiety and depression, as well as
bullying and exam pressures. It includes fiction and personal stories alongside
information and advice, book based therapy and self-help support.
● Long-term conditions list
A new RWBOP list to help people understand and manage the physical and mental
health symptoms of long-term conditions such as diabetes and heart disease is being
14

developed ready for a July 2017 launch. SCL held a roundtable on 20 September,
bringing together health experts to discuss the first-stage mapping and research for
the new list as well as the next steps of its development. Book selection and
co-production work started in October.
● Mood-boosting Books
A new Mood-boosting Books list was launched online in January 2016 and a young
people’s Mood-boosting Books list was developed to coincide with Reading Hack
activity in libraries for BBC #LovetoRead.
● E-learning Module
A RWBOP e-learning module for front line staff as part of SCL’s wider e-learning
workforce development package was launched at the regional SCL roadshows which
showcased all the universal offers to library staff.
● Childhood Obesity
In conjunction with ASCEL (Association of Senior Children’s and Education
Librarians) work has started to develop a children’s strand to the Universal Health
Offer including support to provide autism friendly libraries and the development of a
childhood obesity activities toolkit.
● The Arts Council and Wellcome Trust
Arts Council and the Wellcome Trust each provided £60,000 in 2015/16 to support
core development and delivery of RWBOP. The Wellcome Trust’s partnership with
public libraries will facilitate the innovative ideas in public libraries to support public
participation around health and wellbeing. This ​scheme will be launched in 2017 and
will drive innovation, create new partnerships and add to the evidence base.
Universal Reading Offer
● BBC #LovetoRead
SCL is a key partner in the BBC’s #LovetoRead campaign and works closely with the
BBC and other partners, including The Reading Agency, to ensure libraries have been
able to play a full part in the programme of reading events that the BBC planned.
SCL agreed that libraries would support three areas of the campaign - Shakespeare,
400 years after his death, the centenary of Roald Dahl’s birth and #LovetoRead
weekend.
SCL received £5,000 from Arts Council England to support activity across the
#LovetoRead weekend. ​ More than 650 libraries took part in the #LovetoRead selfie
weekend of 5 - 6 November.
SCL are also working with the Publishers Association to recruit frontline library staff
15

and volunteers to the Reading Ambassadors programme. To date just under 1,000 of
their staff have enrolled.
● Celebrating Shakespeare 2016
SCL received £95,500 from the Arts Council’s Grants for the Arts programme towards
library celebrations to mark Shakespeare’s 400th anniversary. The project aimed to
introduce younger children to Shakespeare in a fun way, to interest teenagers and
encourage adults to revisit his works with a fresh eye.
SCL worked with a number of high-profile partners to ensure maximum reach and
impact: the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, ASCEL, The Reading Agency, CILIP, BBC
Learning, Booksellers’ Association, British Library and the Royal Shakespeare
Company.
Nearly 12,000 people attended Shakespeare Week activities and Selfie Saturday
generated more than 6,000 tweets to #shakespeare16. More than 700 libraries ran
exciting and varied programmes of Shakespeare-themed arts events through to the
end of November.
● Universal Digital Offer
Significant progress has already been made including digital skills training for 14,000
frontline staff, as well as savings secured through national discount deals negotiated
for a wide range of online subscriptions.
● Digital Leadership training
With funding from the Arts Council, Shared Intelligence delivered a 10 week digital
leadership training programme for senior library staff and emerging leaders that
completed in March 2016.
The programme helps individual participants develop leadership skills, gain an
enhanced understanding of the nature and role of digital technologies, and strengthen
relationships and effective networking among library leaders and emerging leaders.
● Partnerships with Halifax and Barclays
SCL worked in partnership with two High Street banks on collaborative projects
designed to assist libraries in offering digital support to people in terms of the
provision of free wifi and basic IT skills training.
A two-year BT and Barclays wifi in Communities project was launched in March 2015
providing free wifi and hands-on digital support at 57 libraries and 13 community
centres in deprived areas of England. In addition, ‘Digital Eagles’ - specially trained
members of Barclays staff - have provided free technology advice at the 80 locations.
In January 2016 more than 2,000 Halifax staff-members pledged to become ‘Digital
Champions’ supporting library IT taster sessions. They have supported SCL in helping
16

people to gain or improve basic skills such as getting online, sending emails,
connecting with their families via the internet, or using social media for the first time.
● Single library digital presence (SLDP)
In 2015 BiblioCommons were commissioned by SCL, with funding from the Arts
Council, to research the potential for a single digital presence for libraries. Their
report, ‘​Essential Digital Infrastructure for Public Libraries in England: A plan for
moving forward’​ was published by SCL in January 2016. SCL worked with the British
Library to host a major engagement workshop for library partners and stakeholders to
consider the early findings of BiblioCommons’ research.
The Bibliocommons report argued for a single, standards-based digital platform and
co-production of services involving library authorities and staff, national and local
partners, and end-users. SCL is now working with the Taskforce and other partners to
take forward the potential for developing the single digital presence.
● Children’s Promise and Children’s Library Journeys
During 2016 ASCEL (The Association of Senior Children’s and Education Librarians)
has been developing programmes which support libraries to deliver the Children’s
Promise and ensure a quality offer throughout children’s library journey.
SCL held a workshop with library staff and partners looking at the first stage of the
children’s journey - the library offer for parents-to-be. With £7,000 funding from the
Arts Council, they are now commissioning a toolkit to support libraries and they will
also be funding and evaluating some pilot projects in 2017.
In June 2016, SCL launched​ ​Autism Friendly Libraries​. With £7,000 funding from the
Arts Council they worked with social care partner Dimensions UK to create a 10
minute film and a suite of resources for library staff to enable library staff to learn
more about the needs of children and young with Autism and their families.
With funding from the Arts Council and ASCEL, SCL developed, and made available
from August 2016, a four module children’s services e-learning package to assist the
library workforce and support their skills and confidence to work with children.
● SixSteps Promise
With funding from the Arts Council, SCL has been working with Share the Vision to
update resources, develop new training and update the Six Steps Promise. This has
enabled the Six Steps Promise to be relaunched, alongside new marketing materials.
Over two thirds of English library authorities have signed up to the Promise and a
promotion to encourage the rest is planned. The Six Steps Training module is now
complete and undergoing testing prior to its release on the SCL Learning Pool
platform.

17

Annex C
The British Library ("the Library")
The British Library is the ​national library​ of the ​United Kingdom​. As a ​legal deposit​ library, it
receives copies of all books produced in the United Kingdom and Ireland. It also works
closely with the public library network to help deliver on a number of issues, principally:
● British Library Business and IP Centre network
This year the Library’s Business & IP Centre has continued working with the existing
network of Business & IP Centres in six public libraries, delivering support services to
entrepreneurs and SMEs across the country. Following a pilot phase which began in
2015, a further Centre in Exeter became fully operational in November 2016, and
another in Northamptonshire is due to be fully operational in February 2017.
In addition, in April 2016, Hull library and Norfolk libraries became members of the
network. The Library is currently supporting them in developing their services,
branding and marketing, building partnerships and training staff.
The Library has successfully negotiated a number of discounted license agreements
with business database publishers, enabling each public library to take up
subscriptions to new resources or make substantial savings on existing collections.
The Business & IP Centre Network supported over 3,500 entrepreneurs, startups and
SMEs in the first half of the 2016-17 financial year. 53% of service users were
women, and 29% were from a BAME background. The Business and IP Centre in
London celebrated its 10​th​ anniversary in September 2016. Over 500,000 people have
used the network in that time, creating over 5,000 business and 12,000 jobs.
● Living Knowledge Network
In September 2016 the Library officially launched the Living Knowledge Network, a
nationwide pilot partnership between the Library and 21 major public libraries in cities
and towns across the UK. The National Library of Scotland and the National Library of
Wales are founding partners of the Network.
The Network, funded by the Arts Council and the Library, has been established to
enable knowledge exchange, encourage collaboration on cultural activity and content
for library users, and build partnerships on initiatives such as funding applications and
evidence gathering. It aspires to strengthen the collective ability of libraries across the
UK to deliver world class library services to diverse communities. It has a combined
audience of 13 million library users.
In the first few months of operating, examples of the network’s activities included
co-ordinated live screenings of events hosted at the Library in Exeter, Leeds and
Middlesbrough, opening up the Library’s cultural programme to whole new audiences
across the UK. The Network also enables staff development across the member
18

libraries; in December representatives from the network convened in Portsmouth for a
skills sharing day designed to spread ideas and knowledge.

19

Annex D
Local Government Association (LGA)
The LGA is the national voice of local government. They work with councils to support,
promote and improve local government. They are a politically-led, cross party organisation
which works on behalf of 350 English councils to ensure local government has a strong,
credible voice with national government.
● Leadership for Libraries Taskforce
The LGA is co-sponsor of the Leadership for Libraries Taskforce, set up to take
forward the recommendations of the Independent Library Report for England. In
addition to reviewing the terms of reference, work programme and resources for the
Taskforce, the LGA has taken an active role in developing and sharing learning from
the Taskforce with other local authorities, including the launch of Libraries Deliver:
Ambition for Public Libraries in 2016-2021.
● Leadership programmes for elected members
In June, the LGA convened a workshop for portfolio holders for libraries to share
thinking, identify new service models and inform the LGA’s improvement work on
libraries. A session on libraries was also held at the LGA’s annual culture, tourism and
sport conference in February.
The LGA has received grant funding from the Arts Council to deliver culture
improvement activity, including on libraries, for 2016-17. This has included two
Leadership Essentials Culture programmes which took place ​in November and
December 2016​, four culture peer challenges and the development of an online
culture good practice toolkit.
The LGA also agreed an updated​ ​Shared Statement of Purpose​ with Arts Council
England. This sets out their shared vision for the contribution that arts and culture,
including libraries, can make and how they’ll work together to realise it.

20

Annex E
Reading Agency
The Reading Agency is a registered charity and an Arts Council NPO. They work with
publishers, schools, colleges, trade unions, prisons, health professionals and the public but
have a strong partnership with public libraries which is celebrated in a Memorandum of
Understanding which is reviewed annually. Their programmes reached 1.6 million people of
all ages across the whole of the UK in 2016. Three examples of these programmes are
outlined below:
● Summer Reading Challenge
The Reading Agency’s Summer Reading Challenge is embedded in the SCL
Universal Reading Offer. The 2016 Big Friendly Read aimed at 4-11 year olds (a
celebration of the writing of Roald Dahl) was delivered in libraries across England and
Wales. ​647,085 children in England ​took part in the main challenge and an additional
20,981 under 4’s in England took part in the pre-school mini challenge.
Over 64,400 children in England joined a local library and there were more than 14.4
million children’s ​loans made over the summer in England.
● Reading Friends
The Reading Agency secured £2.1 million Big Lottery funding to work with a wide
range of partners including SCL over the next 4 years to roll out Reading Friends (a
reading befriending programme for vulnerable and isolated older people).
● Delivery of national reading programmes and support for reading development
The Reading Agency received £140,000 from the Arts Council in March 2016 to
further support national reading programmes and reader development work. Through
this programme of work they are supporting the Libraries Taskforce reading and
literacy Outcome as well as delivering a wide range of other programmes including
supporting over 4,000 adult reading groups and 400 children’s reading groups. These
all help to promote the social reading aspects of the Universal Reading Offer. They
are also managing the Youth Libraries Board which is designed to foster debate and
support activity aimed at encouraging young people to use their libraries as part of the
Reading Hack programme.

21

4th Floor, 100 Parliament Street
London SW1A 2BQ
www.gov.uk/dcms

22

