Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2016 –17
Presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 10 (1) (a) of the Export Control Act 2002

April 2018

© Crown copyright 2018
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government
Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you
will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
enquiries@culture.gov.uk
ISBN 978-1-5286-0167-2
CCS1217629440

04/18

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office

Cover image English tapestry in the Japan/Indian Manner

Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2016 –17
1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017
I

Report of the Secretary of State

II	Report of the Reviewing Committee on
the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

3

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Annual report to Parliament
By the Secretary of State
for Digital, Culture,
Media & Sport

4

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

The Reviewing Committee on the
Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
I am pleased to lay before Parliament the 13th annual
report on the operation of the export controls on objects
of cultural interest, as required by section 10(1) of the
Export Control Act 2002. The report covers the period
1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017. This is the 63rd year that the
Government has published the annual report
of the Reviewing Committee.
The Committee continues to provide an important but
proportionate safety net in ensuring that there is an
opportunity, through the export licensing process, to
save some of our most important national treasures from
permanently leaving the country while sustaining a free
market and respecting the rights of owners.
This has been a particularly busy year for the Reviewing
Committee, which identified 15 out of the 22 objects
referred to it as meeting the Waverley criteria and which
were subsequently placed under export-deferral. All 15
works are outstanding in their own way but several are
worthy of particular mention.
The Fortress of Königstein from the North by Bernardo
Bellotto is a fine example of the artist’s immense skill
and technique and was completed during one of the
most important phases of his career. It is one of the best
examples of its kind and there is much we can learn about
both the artist and the subject from this painting. Visitors
from around the world will now be able to enjoy this
remarkable work at The National Gallery.
A Wedgwood First Day’s Vase is one of only four vases
known to have been made by Josiah Wedgwood on the
opening day of his factory in Staffordshire. Stoke-on-Trent
City Council and The Friends of The Potteries Museum &
Art Gallery raised the necessary £482,500 to buy the vase
and prevent it from leaving the UK. The vase had been
on loan to the Museum for the last 35 years and it
is particularly pleasing to see it remain in its natural
home on a permanent basis.

While on the subject of vases, Scotland also has cause to
celebrate. National Museums Scotland, with support from
the National Heritage Memorial Fund, was able to acquire
one of four vases designed for Cardiff Castle by the noted
architect and designer William Burges. All four vases
are now in the UK and I hope we will see them exhibited
together at some point in the future.
I note the Committee Chair’s comments regarding a
number of policy issues with which I agree. In particular,
Sir Hayden Phillips draws attention to the small but
significant number of cases, such as Pontormo’s Portrait
of a Young Man in a Red Cap in last year’s report, where
export licence applications are withdrawn following the
receipt of a serious expression of interest in raising funds
or when a matching offer is made.
Although the export licensing process has generally
been perceived to have worked well over the years, cases
such as that of Pontormo’s painting have persuaded the
Government to take a fresh look at all aspects of the
export deferral process to ensure it continues to serve
the purpose for which it was originally designed. My
department is therefore carrying out an examination of
the process to see how it might be strengthened.
I am enormously grateful to Sir Hayden and the members
of the Reviewing Committee for the wealth of expertise
and time they devote to the system. I would also like to
thank staff at Arts Council England for the efficient and
smooth running of the process. Finally, thanks must also
go to the expert advisers and the many organisations and
individuals without whose help many of these objects
would not be saved. It is their support, together with the
tireless work of museum staff, volunteers and supporters
throughout the UK, which makes all this possible and
ensures that our public collections are enriched as a result.

Matt Hancock MP
Secretary of State for Digital, Culture,
Media & Sport

Left Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

5

Operation of the Control
The following figures cover the period of this report (1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017).

(a)

Number of applications for individual export licences1

(b)

Number of above applications which were for manuscripts,
documents or archives

(c)

Number of items licensed after reference to expert advisers on
the question of national importance

(d)

Total value of items in (c)

(e)

Number of Open Individual Export Licences (OIEL) in operation
having been issued in previous years to regular exporters for the
export of (i) manuscripts, documents, archives and photographic
positives and negatives; (ii) objects imported into the UK in the
past 50 years; (iii) UK origin coins; (iv) the temporary export of a
Rolls-Royce; (v) the temporary export of objects in soil samples
from archaeological sites in Northern Ireland; (vi) the temporary
export of objects owned or under the control of national
institutions or institutions holding designated collections

(f)

Number of items licensed after the Export Licensing Unit was
satisfied of import into the UK within the past 50 years

(g)

Total value of items in (f)

(h)

Number of items in (f) which were manuscripts,
documents or archives

(i)

Total value of items in (h)

(j)

Number of items given an EU licence without reference to the
question of national importance because they were either:
valued at below the appropriate UK monetary limit2; owned by
a museum or gallery that had an OIEL; manuscripts valued at
£1,500 or less or coins valued at £500 or less and the exporter
held a valid OIEL; musical instruments exported for less than six
months for use in the course of work by a professional musician;
a motor vehicle exported for less than six months for social,
domestic or pleasure purposes; a foreign registered motor vehicle
exported following importation for less than three months for
pleasure purposes; imported into the UK in the last 50 years and
were being exported on a temporary basis

(k)

Total value of items in (j)

1

One application may cover several items.

1 May 2015 –
30 April 2016

1 May 2016 –
30 April 2017

10,585

10,941

1,798

1,792

34,999

27,398

£1,480,594,585

£1,712,154,287

67

673

30,541

22,585

£8,020,208,014

£11,615,616,080

1,045

1,194

£200,038,074

£138,836,939

6,191

3,164

£2,365,008,475

£2,245,429,545

2 	In some cases, an EU export licence may be required to export items that are valued below the
relevant UK monetary limit. In such cases, an EU licence will normally be given without referring
the licence application to the expert adviser on the question of national importance.
3	On 1 January 2017 64 OIELs were renewed or issued for three years.
6

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Report of the Reviewing
Committee on the Export
of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017
To:
The Rt Hon Matt Hancock MP,
Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

63rd Report of
the Reviewing Committee

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

7

Reviewing Committee on the
Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest
Members of the Committee 2016–17
Sir Hayden Phillips (Chair)
Mr Peter Barber
Mr Richard Calvocoressi (reappointed 13 November 2016)
Ms Philippa Glanville
Mr Lowell Libson
Mr Christopher Rowell
Ms Leslie Webster (reappointed 18 February 2017)
Mr Aidan Weston-Lewis

Secretary
Mr Peter Rowlands

Postal Address
Secretary
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works
of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Arts Council England
21 Bloomsbury Street
London WC1B 3HF
A register of interests held by Committee members
is posted on Arts Council England’s website:
www.artscouncil.org.uk

8

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Contents
Report
Part I

Reviewing Committee Report for 2016–17

11

Part II

Operation of the Control

13

Individual export cases
2016–17
Case 1

William Burges vase from the Summer Smoking Room at Cardiff Castle

18

Case 2

Book of Hours in enamelled gold binding

20

Case 3

Two ivory statuettes, Autumn and Winter, by Balthasar Permoser

22

Case 4

Sapphire and diamond coronet commissioned for Queen Victoria

25

Case 5

Study of a Kneeling Man by Titian

27

Case 6

Venus with Cupid Stealing Honey by Lucas Cranach the Elder

29

Case 7	Venice, A View of the Grand Canal looking South from the Palazzo Foscari and Palazzo Moro
Lin Towards the Church of Santa Maria della Carità by Bernardo Bellotto

30

Case 8

English tapestry in the Japan/Indian Manner

31

Case 9

The Christening by William Hogarth

34

Case 10

The Fortress of Königstein from the North by Bernardo Bellotto

36

Case 11

A Dutch Girl at Breakfast by Jean-Étienne Liotard

39

Case 12

Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase

40

Case 13

Mughal sapphire- and ruby-inset huqqa set

42

Case 14

Mughal ruby- and emerald-inset flask

44

Case 15

Virgin and Child with Saint Mary Magdalen and the Infant Saint John the Baptist by Parmigianino

46

Case 16

Part of the Refectory of Walsingham Abbey by John Sell Cotman

48

Case 17

George III mahogany wheel barometer by John Whitehurst

49

Case 18

English gilt bronze, painted and cast iron railings

52

Case 19

Meissen figure of ‘Pulcinell’

54

Case 20

Terre de faïence vase, Tripode, Picasso

56

Case 21

Terre de faïence vase, Oiseaux et Poissons, Picasso

58

Case 22

Glasgow School clock designed by Margaret and Frances Macdonald

60

Full list of plates available at Appendix L, page 84

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

9

Appendices
A

Report on additional funding for acquisitions

63

B

History of export controls in the UK

70

C	Terms of reference of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
D	Membership of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of
Cultural Interest during 2016–17

72
72

E

List of independent assessors who attended meetings during 2016–17

74

F

Value of items placed under deferral (2007–08 to 2016–17)
i) for which permanent licences were issued, and
ii) where items were purchased by UK institutions or individuals

76

G	Items licensed for export after reference to expert advisers for advice 1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017

77

H

Applications considered and deferred on the recommendation of the Reviewing Committee
on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest, 2007–08 to 2016–17

79

I

Composition of the Advisory Council on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest

81

J

Further reading

82

K

Membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents and Archives during 2016–17

83

L

Full list of plates

84

10

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Part I:

Reviewing Committee
Report for 2016–17
1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017
Introduction
During the last year the Reviewing Committee met on
10 occasions and considered an extraordinary variety of
works of art and cultural objects. In this report we detail
the outcome of 22 cases where the Secretary of State’s
expert adviser had objected to the issuing of an export
licence on the grounds that the items under consideration
met one or more of the three criteria established in 1952 by
Viscount Waverley and were, therefore, ‘national treasures’.
At the Committee’s recommendation, the Secretary of
State put in place temporary export deferrals for a wide
array of ‘national treasures’ including: an outstanding
view painting by Bernardo Bellotto of The Fortress of
Königstein from the North; an English tapestry made in the
Indian Manner by 17th-century London weaver Michael
Mazarind, and a Wedgwood First Day’s Vase thrown by
Josiah Wedgwood and Thomas Bentley to commemorate
the establishment of the Etruria factory. One of only four
vases known to have been made by Josiah Wedgwood on
the opening day of his world-famous factory, this elegant
object is evocative of the technical and commercial
revolution of the 18th Century.
Following on from TE Lawrence’s robes and dagger last
year, the Committee considered seminal items closely
linked to prestigious British figures, including a sapphire
and diamond coronet designed by Prince Albert for Queen
Victoria in 1842 and worn by the monarch to the State
opening of Parliament in 1866. Export deferrals were
put in place for two unusual and beautiful Mughal items
brought to the UK by Robert Clive in the late 18th Century
and illustrative of Britain’s complex relationship with the
Indian subcontinent.
The Secretary of State and permanent Committee
members continue to be indebted to a host of specialists,
academics and members of the art trade, who so
generously give their time, adding to the Committee’s
depth of expertise and without whom the system could
not function as well as it does.

Fifteen works with a value of £66,687,500 were
temporarily deferred from export while efforts were
made to retain them. We are particularly pleased to note
that National Museums Scotland, with the generous
assistance of the National Heritage Memorial Fund, was
successful in acquiring the second Burges vase to have
come before the Committee. The vase is the fourth in a
garniture of four vases designed for Cardiff Castle by the
noted architect and designer William Burges. In 2014–15
we were able to report that National Museum Wales
had acquired the third vase. All four vases have been
retained in the UK and are on public display, allowing the
possibility of a future exhibition realising Burges’s vision
for the ensemble.

Provenance information
As noted last year, we would like to emphasise the
importance of applicants providing full provenance
information in order to ensure expeditious processing
of export licence applications. Not only is it necessary
to establish whether or not the item has been in the
UK for over 50 years but provenance information can be
a significant factor in deciding whether an item under
consideration meets the Waverley criteria.
Potential acquiring institutions often approach funding
bodies for financial assistance in their attempts to
acquire export-deferred items. Once an expression
of interest in raising funds has been received, there is
an expectation that the owner of the item will allow
provenance information to be provided to the relevant
funding bodies so the necessary due diligence procedures
can be completed. Failure to provide information could
result in a delay in the Committee considering the case.
Furthermore, it may lead the Committee to recommend
an extension and potentially give grounds for the
Secretary of State to consider refusing a licence.
The Chairman will continue to notify applicants that
if this information is not forthcoming it can prejudice
an institution’s chances of successfully concluding a
purchase. The Committee considers that overseas
purchasers of an object that might satisfy the Waverley
criteria should be made aware by their agents that such
information is essential.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

11

Part I continued
Waverley criteria and objections

Committee members, expert advisers,
The Committee has noted that a higher than usual number independent assessors and the administration
of objects were considered not to meet the Waverley
of the system of export control
criteria this year. The members of the Committee and the
Secretary of State are grateful to the expert advisers for
bringing these items to the Committee’s attention and we
would like to assure expert advisers not to be discouraged
in making an objection. It is important for each object to
be carefully considered against the Waverley criteria.

The practice of withdrawing licence
applications and the refusal of matching offers
The Committee is disappointed to note that, on a few
occasions in recent years, export licence applications have
been withdrawn following receipt of serious expressions
of interest in raising funds, thus depriving UK institutions
of the opportunity to acquire and enrich the United
Kingdom’s public collections. Previously, we reported
that The National Gallery’s offer to purchase Portrait of
a Young Man in a Red Cap by Pontormo was rejected by
the applicant.
The integrity of our system depends on applicants who
agree to accept a matching offer at the hearing of the case
following through on that agreement. The Committee
understands that individual circumstances may vary
and each situation is different and may present specific
considerations which affect whether an applicant can, in
good faith, agree to accept a matching offer. We ask that
applicants give careful consideration before formally
declaring at the case hearing that they are prepared to
accept a matching offer. The Committee remains of
the opinion that such an agreement should not be
made lightly.
It is regrettable that public institutions and
funding bodies have, on the basis of such undertakings,
wasted time, effort and fundraising credibility by raising
the necessary funds only to have their offer rejected. As
has been previously reported, we consider this practice
to run against the grain of the Waverley system and the
conventions surrounding it.
While our export system is designed to strike a balance
between protecting our cultural heritage and individuals’
property rights, the implication of these recent
developments for our current procedures will need to
be considered carefully.

12

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

The Committee would like once more to thank the expert
advisers and the independent assessors for their vital
expertise, time and commitment. The role they all play
is essential to the proper working of the system. We
would also like to thank the Department for Digital,
Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) and the Secretariat to
the Committee and the Export Licensing Unit at the Arts
Council, who administer the system on the Secretary of
State’s behalf, and without whose efforts the system of
export control could not function in the manner in
which it does.
The Reviewing Committee has UK-wide competence for
the Export Control System for Works of Art and Cultural
Goods, and in carrying out that role is conscious of the
importance of the distinct traditions of all parts of the UK.
There were two reappointments to the Committee during
2016–17. Richard Calvocoressi, whose second four-year
term will expire on 12 November 2020, is Director and
Senior Curator of the Gagosian Gallery, London, former
Director of the Henry Moore Foundation and former
Keeper, and then Director, of the Scottish National Gallery
of Modern Art (1987–2007). Richard was originally a
curator at the Tate Gallery (1979–87), where he was
responsible for building up the collections of pre- and
post-War European art. Leslie Webster, whose second
four-year term will expire on 17 February 2021, is former
Keeper of the Department of Prehistory and Europe,
and Senior Curator of the early medieval collections at
the British Museum. She specialises particularly in the
Anglo-Saxon and Viking period, on which she publishes
and lectures widely.
A full list of members can be found at the beginning of this
report and brief biographies are included in Appendix D.

History and operation of the export
control system
A full history of export controls in the UK and their
rationale is in Appendix B. The terms of reference of the
Reviewing Committee are in Appendix C.

Part II:

Operation of the Control
During the period covered by this report
(1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017):
• There were 10,941 applications for export licences
• 1
 ,792 of these applications were for the export
of manuscripts, documents or archives
• The applications covered a total of 53,147 items
• 2
 7,398 items with a value of £1.71 billion
(£1,712,154,287) were issued with export licences
after they had been referred to expert advisers
• 6
 7 Open Individual Export Licences (OIEL)
were in operation at the beginning this period (with
64 from 1 January 2017): a) nine for the export of
manuscripts, documents, archives and photographic
positives and negatives; b) four for the export of goods
over 50 years of age imported into the UK within the
past 50 years; c) one for the export of UK origin coins;
d) one for the temporary export of a Rolls-Royce; e) one
for the temporary export of objects in soil samples from
archaeological sites in Northern Ireland, and f) 51 for
the temporary export of objects over 50 years of age
owned by or under the control of a national institution
or an institution holding a designated collection
• 2
 2,585 items with a value of £11.62 billion
(£11,615,616,080) were issued with export licences
after the Export Licensing Unit was satisfied that they
had been imported into the United Kingdom within
the past 50 years. Of these items with proof of import,
1,194 were manuscripts, documents or archives, with
a total value of £138,836,939

• 3
 ,164 items with a value of £2.25 billion
(£2,245,429,545) were given an EU licence without
reference to the question of national importance
because they were either: valued at below the
appropriate UK monetary limit; owned by a museum or
gallery that has an OIEL; manuscripts valued at £1,500
or less or coins valued at £500 or less and the exporter
holds a valid OIEL; musical instruments exported for
less than three months for use in the course of work by
a professional musician; motor vehicles exported for
less than three months for social, domestic or pleasure
purposes; foreign-registered motor vehicles exported
following importation for less than three months for
pleasure purposes, or imported into the UK in the last
50 years and being exported on a temporary basis

Cases referred to the Committee
In 2016–17, 22 cases were considered by the Committee
because the appropriate expert adviser had objected
to the proposed export on the grounds of national
importance. This is a fraction of the items covered by the
export licensing system and shows that expert advisers
think very carefully before referring cases to us.
The Committee will designate an object as a ‘national
treasure’ if it considers that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune on one or more of the
following three grounds, collectively known as the
Waverley criteria:

History

Aesthetics

Scholarship

Is it closely
connected
with our history
and national life?

Is it of outstanding
aesthetic
importance?

Is it of outstanding
significance for
the study of some
particular branch of
art, learning or history?

Waverley 1

Waverley 2

Waverley 3

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

13

Part II continued

Items found to be
national treasures

Items found not to be
national treasures

Fifteen items were found to meet at least one
of the Waverley criteria:

Seven items were found not to meet any of the Waverley
criteria. They were:

Case 1

 illiam Burges vase from the Summer Smoking
W
Room at Cardiff Castle

Case 6	
Venus with Cupid Stealing Honey by Lucas
Cranach the Elder

Case 2

Book of Hours in enamelled gold binding

Case 3

Two ivory statuettes, Autumn and Winter, by
Balthasar Permoser

Case 7	
Venice, A View of the Grand Canal looking South
from the Palazzo Foscari and Palazzo Moro Lin
Towards the Church of Santa Maria della Carità
by Bernardo Bellotto

Case 4	Sapphire and diamond coronet commissioned
for Queen Victoria
Case 5

Study of a Kneeling Man by Titian

Case 8	English tapestry in the Japan/Indian Manner
Case 9

The Christening by William Hogarth

Case 10	
The Fortress of Königstein from the North
by Bernardo Bellotto
Case 12	Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase

Case 11	
A Dutch Girl at Breakfast by Jean-Étienne
Liotard
Case 16 P art of the Refectory of Walsingham Abbey
by John Sell Cotman
Case 20 Terre de faïence vase, Tripode, Picasso
Case 21 T
 erre de faïence vase, Oiseaux et Poissons,
Picasso
Case 22	Glasgow School clock designed by Margaret and
Frances Macdonald

Case 13	Mughal sapphire- and ruby-inset huqqa Set
Case 14 Mughal ruby- and emerald-inset flask
Case 15	
V irgin and Child with Saint Mary Magdalen and
the Infant Saint John the Baptist by Parmigianino
Case 17	George III mahogany wheel barometer
by John Whitehurst
Case 18	English gilt bronze, painted and cast iron railings
Case 19 Meissen figure of ‘Pulcinell’

National treasures referred
to the Secretary of State
Fifteen cases were referred to the Secretary of State
for deferral and the Secretary of State accepted the
Committee’s recommendations on all of them.
The aggregate value of the 15 deferred items was
£67 million (£66,687,500).

Items where the licence application
was withdrawn following a serious
expression of interest
Following submission to the Secretary of State, three
cases were withdrawn:
Case 4	Sapphire and diamond coronet commissioned
for Queen Victoria
Case 13	Mughal sapphire- and ruby-inset
huqqa set		
Case 14 Mughal ruby- and emerald-inset flask

14

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Deferred items that were acquired

Cases from previous years

Of the 15 deferred items, the following four were acquired
by institutions or individuals in the United Kingdom:

At the time of writing our 2015–16 annual report, there
were two unresolved deferrals:

Case 1	William Burges vase from the Summer Smoking
Room at Cardiff Castle
Case 8	English tapestry in the Japan/Indian
Manner
Case 10	
The Fortress of Königstein from the North by
Bernardo Bellotto
Case 12	Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase
These had a total value of £12 million (£11,836,500),
which represents 18 per cent of the total value of objects
that were deferred.

National treasures that
were not saved
Unfortunately, it was not possible to retain in the UK
every national treasure that was deferred. Export licences
were (or can be) issued for the eight items listed below:
Case 2

Book of Hours in enamelled gold binding

Case 3

Two ivory statuettes, Autumn and Winter, by
Balthasar Permoser

Case 5

Study of a Kneeling Man by Titian

Case 9

The Christening by William Hogarth

Case 15	
V irgin and Child with Saint Mary Magdalen and
the Infant Saint John the Baptist by Parmigianino
Case 17	George III mahogany wheel barometer
by John Whitehurst
Case 18	English gilt bronze, painted and cast iron railings

Case 10 2015–16 P ortrait of a Young Man in a Red Cap
by Pontormo
Before the end of the second deferral period The National
Gallery made a matching offer of £30,618,987 to the
owner which the owner rejected. The Secretary of State
therefore decided to refuse an export licence. This is in
accordance with the published guidelines to exporters.
Case 18 2015–16	Scottish Seal Matrix Pair (formerly
known as Medieval King Robert the
Bruce of Scotland and Dunfermline
Abbey Cokete Seal Matrix Pair)
In 2015–16 we noted that the export deferral process for
the seal matrices was suspended to allow new information
to be considered. In January 2017, the Committee
reconsidered the case. The seal matrix pair was found to
meet the third Waverley criterion for their outstanding
significance to the study of sigillography and Scottish
antiquarianism. The Committee recommended the sum of
£151,250 as a fair matching price. The Committee agreed
to recommend to the Secretary of State that the decision
on the export licence should be deferred for an initial
period of three months. If, within that period, Arts Council
England received notification of a serious intention to
raise funds with a view to making an offer to purchase the
seal matrix pair, the Committee recommended that there
should be a further deferral period of three months. At the
end of the initial deferral period, no offer to purchase the
seal matrices had been made and we were not aware of
any serious intention to raise funds. An export licence was
therefore issued.
Further information can be found on the Arts Council
website. The case will be reported in full in next year’s
annual report.

Case 19 Meissen figure of ‘Pulcinell’
These have a collective value of £41 million (£41,363,000),
which represents 62 per cent of the total value of objects
placed under deferral and 53 per cent of the total number.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

15

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Individual
export cases

Right Detail from Virgin and Child with Saint Mary
Magdalen and the Infant Saint John the Baptist by
Parmigianino
16

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

17

Case 1 William Burges vase from the Summer
Smoking Room at Cardiff Castle
This flower vase in glazed stoneware with painted
and gilded decoration was designed by William
Burges (1827–81) for Cardiff Castle in Wales, and
probably made in Shropshire, possibly decorated
in London. Dated 1874, it is 36cm high, with
a diameter of 21.6cm.
The applicant had applied to export the vase to
the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £225,000, which represented
the agreed sale price subject to the granting of an
export licence.
The Senior Curator and Head of Ceramics & Glass,
Department of Sculpture, Metalwork, Ceramics
and Glass, Victoria and Albert Museum,
acting as expert adviser, had objected
to the export of the vase under the
first and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was so
closely connected with our history and
national life and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of William
Burges’s great range and skill as a
designer and the eclecticism that
characterised his style.
The expert adviser stated that
as one of a set of four, the vase
was created to form an integral
part of the interior decoration
of Cardiff Castle, one of the
pre-eminent architectural and
decorative commissions

Plate 1a William Burges vase from the Summer Smoking
Room at Cardiff Castle (front)
18

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

of the 19th Century in Britain and certainly the
most significant in Wales.
William Burges was one of the most original
and important British architects and designers
of the 19th Century. His work drew on a great
range of sources, including the arts of the Middle
Ages, the Islamic world and East Asia. Burges
created two of the most opulent Gothic Revival
buildings in Britain, Cardiff Castle and Castell
Coch. The commission to rebuild Cardiff Castle
for John Patrick Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess
of Bute (1847–1900), provided Burges with an
unprecedented opportunity to realise his ideas
on a grand scale.
This vase was one of four designed in 1874 to be
placed on stone brackets in the corners of the
Summer Smoking Room, a galleried interior at the
top of the dominant Clock Tower of the Castle.
On completing the main interiors of the Castle,
Burges inscribed Lord Bute’s name and date onto
wood or marble. For the Summer Smoking Room,
Burges had his patron’s name and the date
inscribed around the vase: the inscription
‘IOHNS PATCS. MARQ. DE BUTE’ runs around
the body, where it is embellished with Bute’s
armorial bearings, and ‘ANNO DOMINI 1874’
is inscribed around the neck.
The shape of the vase was very closely
related to European, Middle Eastern
and Chinese examples of multi-necked
vases. The bright polychrome and gilded
decoration drew on European maiolica,

Turkish fritware and medieval manuscripts. The
blue, green, gold and ochre colours reflected the
Summer Smoking Room interior, and the love birds
adorning this vase were also depicted throughout,
including on the hood of the chimneypiece, possibly
in celebration of Bute’s 10 years of marriage. The
suite of four vases represented extremely rare pieces
by Burges in being wholly of ceramic materials.
The semi-stoneware body had been hand moulded
and modelled, fired and decorated with coloured
pigments fired in the glaze, then gilded over the glaze.
The expert adviser said that it would be highly
desirable for the complete set of four vases to
remain in Britain in the public domain. The vases
were essential for a proper understanding
of Burges’s vision for the Summer Smoking
Room and his use of objects alongside
sculptural and painted decoration to define
the architectural space. Furthermore,
they were also important in the context of
ceramics in the Gothic Revival style, as items
of such quality and significance associated
with Wales were exceptionally rare.
Two of the four vases were formerly
in the Handley-Read collection and
were presently in the Victoria and
Albert Museum, London, and The
Higgins Bedford. The third vase was
purchased by National Museum
Wales in December 2015 following
a temporary export bar and
was reported as case 15 in our
2014–15 annual report.

The applicant did not disagree that the vase met
the Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in May 2016 when the vase was
shown to us. We found that it met the first, second
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our
history and national life, it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the development of
William Burges’s great range and skill as a designer
and the eclecticism that characterised his style.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £225,000 (plus VAT of £45,000). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the vase, the deferral
period should be extended by a further
five months.
During the initial deferral period, we
were informed of a serious intention by
National Museums Scotland to raise funds
to purchase the vase. A decision on the
export licence application was deferred
for a further five months. We were
subsequently informed that the vase had
been purchased by National Museums
Scotland with assistance from the
National Heritage Memorial Fund.

Plate 1b William Burges vase from the Summer Smoking
Room at Cardiff Castle (reverse)
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

19

Plate 2a Book of Hours in enamelled gold binding (exterior)
20

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Case 2 Book of Hours in
enamelled gold binding
A richly decorated book with original
jewelled metalwork binding, 85mm by 65mm,
made of enamelled gold set with cornelian
intaglios and cameos, and framed with rubies,
turquoises and a tourmaline. Inside is an
illuminated parchment Book of Hours, painted
with 20 devotional images accompanying the
prayers to be said at different hours of the
day. The book is dated 1532 and was probably
made in Paris.
The applicant had applied to export the Book of
Hours to France. The value shown on the export
licence application was £8,000,000, which
represented an agreed sale price subject to the
granting of an export licence.
The Head of Western Heritage Collections,
British Library, acting as expert adviser, had
objected to the export of the Book of Hours under
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of art history, the history
of the book, painting and jewellery design in
16th-century France.
The expert adviser stated that the book, with
its original metal cover studded with jewels and
precious stones, was an extraordinary survival,
unique in 16th-century art. Jewelled books from
any period are extremely rare, as their precious
materials were vulnerable to removal and reuse
and taken together with the high-quality painting
inside the book – which may have been designed in
tandem with the binding – it was a masterful work
of outstanding artistic significance.
The manuscript bears an important witness of
the splendours of the Renaissance French court
and the continued importance of personal piety
and devotion represented in handmade books
generations after the advent of printing. Moreover,
because of the presence of an artist who may
have primarily been a panel painter, this largely
unexamined manuscript had the potential to rewrite
the history of the 1520s Hours atelier, an important
group of book artists who collaborated on highquality illuminated manuscripts mainly for royal and
aristocratic patrons, and revised our understanding
of artistic practice in 16th-century France.

The applicant did not disagree that the Book of
Hours met the second Waverley criterion.
We heard this case in May 2016 when the Book
of Hours was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of the book, of the applied arts and of
iconology at the Renaissance court of François I of
France. We recommended that the decision on the
export licence application should be deferred for
an initial period of three months to allow an offer
to purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £8,000,000. We further recommended that if,
by the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the Book of Hours, the deferral period should be
extended by a further six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the Book of Hours had been made and
we were not aware of any serious intention to raise
funds. An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 2b Book of Hours in enamelled gold binding (detail from interior)
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

21

Case 3 Two ivory
statuettes, Autumn
and Winter, by
Balthasar Permoser
Autumn, 24cm by 9cm by 5cm, and Winter, 22cm
by 9.5cm by 5cm, are personified allegorical
depictions of the classical gods Bacchus and
Vulcan from a set of four Seasons. The artist’s
signature ‘BAT:P:INV’ (monogram of BALThAsAR.
PERMOsER.IN.V.F) is on the back, and they date
from circa 1695.
The applicant had applied to export the
statuettes to the Herzog Anton Ulrich Museum
in Braunschweig, Germany, which had agreed to
buy them for £1,800,000, the value shown on the
export licence application, subject to the granting
of an export licence.
The Senior Curator of Sculpture, Victoria and Albert
Museum, acting as expert adviser, had objected
to the export of the statuettes under the second
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
their departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because they were of outstanding aesthetic
importance and of outstanding significance for the
study of Permoser and his working methods.
The expert adviser stated that the remarkable
virtuoso ivory carving of the two figures illustrated
Permoser’s genius as a sculptor at his best and
these two pieces were some of the finest smallscale sculptures in Europe from the Baroque era.
They belonged with their pendant seasons, Spring
and Summer (at Braunschweig in the Herzog Anton
Ulrich Museum). The four together presented a
harmonious group and were likely to have been
made in the same year, 1695.

Plate 3 Two ivory statuettes, Autumn and
Winter, by Balthasar Permoser
22

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

23

All four statuettes were first recorded in
the possession of August Wilhelm, Duke of
Braunschweig-Wolfenbüttel (1662–1731),
on 9 October 1722 when they were taken to
Salzdahlum Castle at Braunschweig. They were
probably acquired by his father Anton Ulrich,
Duke of Braunschweig-Wolfenbüttel (1633–1714),
almost certainly via his youngest son, Ludwig
Rudolf (1671–1735), who visited Dresden in 1695.
Permoser moved to Dresden in 1690 to work at
the court of the Elector of Saxony and it was there
that the statuettes were made in 1695. They may
have been intended as diplomatic gifts from the
Elector of Saxony to the Duke of BraunschweigWolfenbüttel via his son. They were documented
in the ducal collections in Braunschweig until
the early 19th Century, when a war resulted in
their separation.
Permoser was one of the greatest sculptors of the
German Baroque and was a master of small-scale
ivory carving as well as of monumental pieces in
stone. Born in Kammer on the borders of Prussia
in 1651, he trained initially in Salzburg, went to
Vienna in 1671 (where he probably studied ivory
carving) and in around 1677 entered the service of
the Medici Grand Duke in Florence, working as an
assistant of Giovanni Battista Foggini (1652–1725).
He died in 1732.
Only one other work was attributed to Permoser
in the UK, the ivory Entombment at the Victoria
and Albert Museum, which differed radically from
the two freestanding small-scale ivory figures
in both form and subject. Their retention would
enable students of his work to gain a far better
understanding of his skills and achievements.
The applicant declined to comment on the
Waverley status of the statuettes.
We heard this case in June 2016 when the
statuettes were shown to us. We found that
they met the second and third Waverley criteria
on the grounds that their departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because they were
of outstanding aesthetic importance and they
were of outstanding significance for the study of
international influences in European sculpture
(especially sculpture made in Britain – Permoser
having been master of Louis-François Roubiliac).

Plate 3 (detail) Two ivory statuettes,
Autumn and Winter, by Balthasar Permoser
24

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price of
£1,800,000 (plus VAT of £360,000). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the statuettes, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
three months.
When considering our recommendation, the then
Minister for the Arts took into account arguments
put forward by the applicant, the Herzog Anton
Ulrich Museum in Braunschweig and the cultural
office of the state of Lower Saxony, that the
statuettes should be allowed to be reunited with
their pendants from which they had been separated
by a war in the early 19th Century. In recognition
of those arguments, the Minister decided to set the
initial period of deferral at one month, followed
by a further three months, should a potential
purchaser show a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the statuettes.
At the end of the initial one-month period, no offer
to purchase had been made and we were not aware
of any serious intention to raise funds. An export
licence was therefore issued.

Case 4 Sapphire and diamond coronet
commissioned for Queen Victoria
This coronet or tiara, terminating in two
gold loops, and mounted with 11 step-cut
sapphires set in gold and with diamonds set
in silver, was made in 1842 and is 3.8cm high
and 11.5cm in diameter.
The applicant had applied to export the coronet to
Singapore. The value shown on the export licence
application was £5,000,000, which represented
an agreed sale price subject to the granting of an
export licence.
The Senior Curator, Sculpture, Metalwork, Ceramics
and Glass Department, Victoria and Albert
Museum, acting as expert adviser, had objected to
the export of the coronet under the first and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was
so closely connected with our history and national
life and it was of outstanding significance for the
study of the young Queen Victoria.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the coronet had a threefold significance: its role in the portraits by
Winterhalter, Thorburn and Graves; its selection
by Queen Victoria for the 1866 Opening of
Parliament; and its importance as a jewel from the
earlier part of Queen Victoria’s reign.

The coronet made a major contribution to one of
the most beautiful official portraits of the young
Queen Victoria. Painted in 1842, the year she paid
for the coronet, the portrait was the earliest by
Winterhalter of the Queen. Numerous replicas
and copies of the portrait, in its two variants, were
made and served as personal and official gifts.
The design of the coronet, which owed much to
the Saxon Rautenkranz, had been associated with
Prince Albert. The use of the coronet in the portrait
was a brilliant device, an affirmation of Victoria’s
authority as sovereign, which did not detract
from her charm and beauty as a young woman.
The coronet is one of the significant jewels of her
reign, part of the story of the young Victoria, who
delighted in the coloured gemstones which, after
Albert’s death, she almost entirely forsook. In
1866 the coronet was the royal symbol she chose
to wear in place of a crown at the first Opening
of Parliament that she attended as a widow. The
sapphire and diamond coronet is a rare and historic
jewel intimately linked to the life of Queen Victoria
and to the image which she projected in Britain,
Europe, the Empire and beyond.
The applicant declined to comment on the
Waverley status of the coronet.
Plate 4a Sapphire and diamond coronet commissioned
for Queen Victoria (side view)

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

25

We heard this case in January 2016 when the
coronet was shown to us. We found that it
met the first and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected
with our history and national life and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of the image
of Queen Victoria as depicted in Winterhalter’s
earliest portrait of her. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of four months
to allow an offer to purchase to be made at the
fair matching price of £5,000,000 (plus VAT of
£1,000,000). We further recommended that if, by
the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the coronet, the deferral period should be extended
by a further six months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of an offer from a private source to purchase the
coronet at the fair matching price with a guarantee
of reasonable public access. A decision on the
export licence application was deferred for a
further six months. Before the end of the second
deferral period, the applicant withdrew their
application. The applicant was informed that, in
accordance with normal policy, any subsequent
re-application would normally be treated as if the
Secretary of State had refused the licence.
We subsequently learned that the coronet was
acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum,
purchased through the generosity of William and
Judith, Douglas and James Bollinger as a gift to the
Nation and Commonwealth.

Plate 4b Sapphire and diamond coronet commissioned
for Queen Victoria (front view)
26

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Case 5 Study of a Kneeling
Man by Titian
This black-and-white chalk drawing on
discoloured blue paper is by Tiziano Vecellio,
called Titian (1485/90–1576), and measures
25.6cm by 18.2cm.
The applicant had applied to export the drawing
to the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £4,790,500, which represented
the price the owner had paid for the drawing. This
figure also included US sales tax of £390,500 (this
would be recoverable by the owner and therefore
not payable in the event of a UK sale).
The Keeper of Prints and Drawings at The British
Museum, assisted by the Curator of Italian and
French Prints and Drawings, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the drawing under
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for the
study of Titian’s draughtsmanship and the broader
story of the stylistic development within the history
of Italian art.
The expert adviser had provided a written submission
stating that the drawing was an important and
imposing example of Titian’s draughtsmanship at
the very height of his fame and artistic maturity. It
was one of only 39 drawings accepted as autograph
works by the artist. Of those 39, nine were in British
collections, namely the two private collections
at Chatsworth and Harewood, three university
collections at the Ashmolean, Fitzwilliam and Christ
Church, and one national collection at The British
Museum. Of the nine drawings in British collections,
four were in black chalk on blue paper: Two Lovers
Embracing (Fitzwilliam), A Falling Horseman
(Ashmolean), St Peter (The British Museum) and
the present drawing.

There was scholarly consensus that Study of a
Kneeling Man was a preparatory drawing for the
first version of Titian’s Pentecost commissioned
for the church of Santo Spirito in Isola in 1529.
Titian had initially made little progress with the
commission and in 1541 the monks were forced
to remind him of his obligation. The Pentecost
was, however, not a success and paint was already
peeling from the painting by 1543. When the
monks complained, it appears that Titian removed
the unsuccessful damaged first version and painted
another from scratch. It was this second version
which was moved from Santo Spirito to the Salute
in the 17th Century, where it remains to this day.
The first version of the Pentecost is thought lost.

Plate 5 Study of a Kneeling Man by Titian
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

27

Titian’s painterly use of black chalk on blue paper
was adopted by artists of the next generation,
Tintoretto and Veronese foremost among them,
and became one of the most distinctive aspects
of Venetian draughtsmanship. In its emphasis on
the modulation of light and shade, rather than
the crisp delineation of a figure, it also embodied
the difference in artistic approaches between the
painters of the Veneto and, in particular, their
Florentine and Roman contemporaries. As such,
the drawing was not only valuable as a powerful
and much-admired drawing by Titian, but also as
part of the broader story of stylistic development
within the history of Italian art.
The applicant disagreed that the drawing met the
Waverley criteria, stating in a written submission
that the work could not be considered a major work
or of outstanding significance and it lacked the
historical importance that came with a direct link
to the artist’s foremost painted commissions. A
connection with the Salute Pentecost was generally
accepted, but it did not correspond directly to any
figure in the painting. It was also not in perfect
condition, with some surface rubbing in the chalk,
and some disturbing stains.
The UK possessed the most significant number of
Titian drawings outside Italy. Furthermore, the
full range of Titian’s known graphic oeuvre was
well represented in British collections. Lastly, the
drawing had a lengthy British provenance. It was
possibly part of the collection of Nicholas Lanier
(1588–1666) and was later owned by the sculptor

28

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Thomas Banks (1735–1805) and the painter Sir
Edward Poynter (1836–1919) at whose sale it was
acquired by Viscount Lascelles. It was, however,
never considered a very significant work in these
collections and had not appeared in any of the
major Titian exhibitions of the last half century.
It was a good but not exceptional drawing by a
major artist in only satisfactory condition and
clearly inferior to several drawings by Titian in
British public collections.
We heard this case in July 2016 when the drawing
was shown to us. We found that it met the
third Waverley criterion on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for
the study of the working practice of Titian, one of
the greatest artists of 16th-century Venice. We
recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £4,400,000 (plus VAT of £81,400). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a
view to making an offer to purchase the drawing,
the deferral period should be extended by a
further four months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the drawing had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Case 6 Venus with Cupid Stealing Honey
by Lucas Cranach the Elder
This painting is oil on panel, 51.1cm by 36.2cm,
signed and dated 1537 (upper left, on the tree).
Directly below the date (in the same yellow
paint), can be found the insignia of Lucas
Cranach the Elder (1472–1553): a serpent
with elevated wings.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to Belgium. The value shown on the export licence
application was £3,408,900, which represented the
price the owner had paid for the painting.
The Director of The National Gallery, assisted
by the Deputy Director and Curator of Early
Netherlandish, German, and British Paintings,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the export
of the painting under the first, second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was
so closely connected with our history and national
life, it was of outstanding aesthetic importance and
it was of outstanding significance for the study of
Northern Renaissance art and its collecting history
in 19th- and 20th-century Britain.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that in their view the painting
under consideration met all three of the Waverley
criteria. Overall it was of exceptional importance

as a signed and dated work by an artist of European
significance, which was formerly owned by John
Rushout, 2nd Baron Northwick, one of the most
prominent British collectors of Early Northern
paintings, and was of an extremely high quality of
execution. The classical mythological subject of
the painting, in combination with the Latin text,
which was unique among the 27 extant versions of
the composition, made the picture an outstanding
example of a kind of conversation piece, in which
text and image were devised together to enrich the
work’s meaning, that would have been admired and
enjoyed in the humanist circles of the Wittenberg
court. In this way, the painting provided a unique
insight into the intellectual context in which the
artist worked and the learned audience to which
he catered. It allowed the study of the meaning,
function and use of paintings within the context of
courtly humanist imagery, as well as ideas central
to the Protestant Reformation.
The applicant declined to comment on the
Waverley status of the painting.
We heard this case in July 2016 when the painting
was shown to us. We found that the painting
did not meet any of the Waverley criteria and
recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

29

Case 7 Venice, A View of the Grand Canal
looking South from the Palazzo Foscari and
Palazzo Moro Lin Towards the Church of Santa
Maria della Carità by Bernardo Bellotto
This view painting by Bernardo Bellotto, called
Canaletto (1722–80), is oil on canvas, 59.7cm by
89.5cm, completed probably 1738–39.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to Monaco. The value shown on the export licence
application was £2,638,400, which represented the
hammer price paid by the owner at auction, plus
buyer’s premium.
The Director of The National Gallery, assisted
by the Curator of Italian and Spanish Paintings
1600–1800 and the Baroque Curatorial Assistant,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the export
of the painting under the first Waverley criterion
on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the painting under
consideration was important in the context of
Bellotto’s early career in Venice, and that it was
intimately linked with one of his earliest and most
important patrons, Henry Howard, 4th Earl of
Carlisle. Collectively, the Castle Howard Bellottos
constituted one of the most important groups of
works by the artist that have remained in the same
family collection for which they were painted.
These four paintings hung together at Castle
Howard – in their matching, original carved and
gilt wood frames – from the mid-18th Century
until 2015.

30

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

The painting under consideration formed part of a
series of more than 40 Venetian views by different
artists that hung at Castle Howard. In the context
of British patronage of 18th-century Venetian view
painters, the importance of this group of Bellottos
was on a par with Canaletto’s series of 12 pictures
showing sequential views of the Grand Canal,
painted for Consul Joseph Smith and acquired with
the rest of Smith’s collection by George III in 1762;
or the 24 views painted by Canaletto in 1732–35 for
John Russell, 4th Duke of Bedford (1710–71), still
at Woburn Abbey; or even the 20 views painted by
Canaletto in the mid-1730s for Charles, 5th Earl of
Sunderland and 3rd Duke of Marlborough (1706–
58), known as the ‘Harvey group’.
The applicant disagreed that the painting met
any of the Waverley criteria. They had stated in a
written submission that while they appreciated
the painting had been at Castle Howard since it
was commissioned in the 18th Century, there
were comparable examples of significant works by
Bellotto on public display in the United Kingdom.
These were similar in terms of their date of
execution, provenance and aesthetic importance.
We heard this case in July 2016 when the painting
was shown to us. We found that the painting
did not meet any of the Waverley criteria and
recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was issued.

Case 8 English tapestry in
the Japan/Indian Manner

Woven in silk and wool with the mark of English
manufacture and the name M.MAZARIND in its
border, the tapestry, measuring 236cm by 387cm,
was likely to have been woven before 1700. Parish
rate-books note the name Michael Mazarind in
a workshop on the south side of Portugal Street
(now Piccadilly) between 1696 and 1702.
The applicant had applied to export the tapestry
to the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £67,500, which represented an
agreed sale price subject to the granting of an
export licence.
The Acting Keeper, Furniture, Textiles and
Fashion, Victoria and Albert Museum, acting as
expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
tapestry under the third Waverley criterion on
the grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of tapestry-weaving
in England.
The expert adviser said that the tapestry was
woven in silk and wool, and depicted small groups
of Oriental figures and buildings arranged on
separate islands, which appeared to float on a deep
blue background. It was the only surviving tapestry
with the workshop mark for Michael Mazarind,
and was thus the only physical evidence of his
tapestry workshop, which between 1696 and 1702

Plate 6 English tapestry in the Japan/Indian Manner

was located on the south side of Portugal Street
in London. It therefore provided a benchmark for
further research into his work. The substantial
influence of Mazarind’s work on ‘the Indian
Manner’ genre, one of the most popular styles of
English tapestry, was only now becoming apparent.
While compromised, having been cut and rejoined
down the centre, the tapestry’s condition was
better than many of its contemporaries and
good enough to reveal the distinctive style and
content that distinguished a series of at least four
tapestries, which were likely to have been designed
and woven before 1700.
Surviving examples of the Indian Manner genre
included examples signed by John Vanderbank
(1694–1739, a prominent weaver and supplier to
the Royal Household) and examples could be found
at Belton House, Weston Park and in the Victoria
and Albert Museum. Most surviving Indian Manner
tapestries were usually catalogued as woven by
Vanderbank or his workshop, or in his style. Former
Victoria and Albert Museum Curator Wendy
Hefford’s research and analysis had established the
particular significance of the Mazarind series. The
series, of which the current tapestry was a part,
was not connected with Vanderbank’s two series
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

31

32

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

but was instead a contemporary competitor on
the market. The inter-relationship of the different
versions of Indian Manner tapestries was highly
complex. From this tapestry, and crucially through
its further physical examination and analysis, it
would be possible to undertake significant research
into Mazarind’s workshop.
The applicant disagreed that the tapestry met
the Waverley criteria because it had undergone
significant alterations and restorations, including
rearrangement of the borders, so that it could not
be said to be of outstanding aesthetic importance
and there were several other examples of
Vanderbank tapestries in public collections.
We heard this case in September 2016 when the
tapestry was shown to us. We found that it met
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for
the study of Mazarind’s workshop (as the only
example of a tapestry bearing his signature) and
for the study of textile production in 17th-century
London and the influence of royal patronage. We
recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £67,500. We further recommended that if, by
the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the tapestry, the deferral period should be
extended by a further three months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, the
Victoria and Albert Museum, which acted as
champion for the tapestry, informed us that
it had decided, having exhausted every other
possibility of purchase by another public body,
that it had an obligation to the national interest
to try to raise funds to purchase the tapestry.
Although the expression of interest came from the
Secretary of State’s expert adviser, confirmation
was obtained at the time of the objection and the
meeting that the institution with which they were
connected was not making enquiries with a view
to purchasing, or in the process of purchasing the
item. A decision on the export licence application
was deferred for a further three months. We were
subsequently informed that the tapestry had been
purchased by the Victoria and Albert Museum.

Plate 6 (detail) English tapestry in the
Japan/Indian Manner
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

33

Case 9 The Christening
by William Hogarth
The Christening (or ‘Orator Henley Christening
a Child’), was completed by William Hogarth
(1697–1764) in probably 1728. Oil on canvas,
it measures 49.5cm by 62.8cm.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £1,036,000, which represented
an agreed sale price subject to the granting of an
export licence.
The Lead Curator, Pre-1800 British Art, Tate Britain,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the export
of the painting under the first, second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was so
closely connected with our history and national life, it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of William
Hogarth, as well as for the study of the cultural,
literary and historical life of the 18th Century.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that the painting was a significant early
work by William Hogarth, who was generally
considered to be the founding father of the ‘British
School’, and whose satirical view of life both

exemplified and excoriated the national character.
Painted circa 1728, it was a ‘key document’ in the
development in his style; The Christening marked
Hogarth’s move from illustration and engraving,
and helped to establish his reputation as a painter.
Hogarth was well represented in UK national and
regional collections, with broadly comparable
work including non-comic conversation pieces
The Gaols Committee of the House of Commons
(National Portrait Gallery) and The Beggar’s Opera
(Birmingham Museums Trust). Later moral subjects
were represented by A Rake’s Progress (Sir John
Soane’s Museum) and Marriage A-la-Mode (The
National Gallery, London). However, the most
closely comparable works that reflected Hogarth’s
work at this point in his career were in non-UK
museums, including The Denunciation (National
Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) and The Sleeping
Congregation (Minneapolis Institute of Arts).
The painting illustrated Hogarth’s characteristic
style, which combined painterly elegance
with satire conveyed through the details of
the composition. The painting was visually
complex and represented a wealthy but badly
run 18th-century household, gathered to
witness the christening of a child. Contemporary
documentation suggested this painting gained
the artist ‘much reputation’ at the beginning of
his career, establishing his reputation as a painter
of satirical scenes of contemporary life. The work
was included in the two major retrospectives of
Hogarth’s art (in 1971 and 2007) and had drawn
commentary from all of the artist’s most important
art historical commentators and biographers.
The applicant disagreed that the painting met
the Waverley criteria. They stated in a written
submission that, although Hogarth was one of
the most original, inventive and ambitious British
artists of the 18th Century, this particular picture
itself was not so closely connected with our history
and national life that its departure would be
a misfortune.
The painting prefigured some of the themes that
the artist was to return to in his later satirical
pictorial series, and was a good early example of
the artist’s early work, but was not of outstanding
aesthetic importance in the context of the artist’s
oeuvre or in the wider context of British art.
The applicant suggested that the painting was
likely to have been conceived as a companion
piece to Hogarth’s The Denunciation, as both
pictures were concerned with similar themes and
were reproduced together as a pair of prints by

34

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Joseph Sympson Jr., published in the early 1730s.
However, if the two paintings were intended to be
viewed as a pendant pair, then the full aesthetic
impact of the work had been reduced by their
separation. Furthermore, while the picture was
certainly of academic interest as an early work in
oil by the artist in which he displayed his talent
for social observation and commentary, many
of Hogarth’s most ambitious and best-known
satirical works in oil could already be seen in public
collections in the United Kingdom.
The condition report prepared for the painting
confirms that the work was not in good overall
condition, early damage to the grisaille layers having
been exacerbated by later cleaning and retouching.
We heard this case in October 2016 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for the
study of 18th-century life and society, as well as

the development of Hogarth as an artist of national
importance. We recommended that the decision on
the export licence application should be deferred
for an initial period of three months to allow an
offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £1,223,100 ($1,500,000 converted into
Pound Sterling at the date of the meeting at a
rate of $1 = £0.8154). We further recommended
that if, by the end of the initial deferral period, a
potential purchaser had shown a serious intention
to raise funds with a view to making an offer to
purchase the painting, the deferral period should be
extended by a further three months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the painting had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 7 and detail The Christening by William Hogarth
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

35

Case 10 The Fortress of Königstein
from the North by Bernardo Bellotto
This work by Bernardo Bellotto, also known
as Canaletto (1722–80), is oil on canvas, and
measures 132.1cm by 236.2cm.
An export licence application for this painting and its
companion, The Fortress of Königstein from the South,
was considered on 17 July 2015 but subsequently
withdrawn (RCEWA case 25, 2015–16).
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £11,000,000, which represented
the price the owner had paid for the painting.
The Acting Keeper, Department of Western Art,
Ashmolean Museum, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the painting under
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of Bellotto and the representation
of European dynastic strength, military might and
enlightened rule.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that The Fortress of Königstein
from the North was a superb painting of great
aesthetic merit. It was an unusual view painting
by Bellotto, whose artistic achievements and
independent vision had only recently been fully
recognised. From a low viewpoint, with travellers
and peasants on the road, the historic fortress of
Königstein, with its diverse buildings, reared up
imposingly as though emerging from the craggy
rockface. The cool light playing over the various
structures, the deep tonalities of greys and browns,
the pattern of white accents across the surface
and, above all, the sheer variety of shades of green
conveyed both the chilly strength of the fortress
and the calmness and fertility of the surrounding
countryside. The freshness of handling enlivened
the painting, adding to the sense of a view captured
in specific atmospheric conditions.
Bellotto’s boldness of vision was striking: his
response to the landscape of Saxony was imbued
with a Piranesian sense of the expressiveness of
architecture, and the character of the painting was
wholly unlike the earlier Italian city views that
were mainly found in UK collections. Of the four
views of Königstein remaining in this country, it
was the most significant and visually arresting in
its treatment and iconography.

36

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Bellotto began work at Königstein about 30 March
1756, no doubt making drawings there. His two
views of the interior of the complex (Manchester
Art Gallery) emphasised the variety of its buildings
and the orderliness of military and domestic
life there; but it was the three exterior views
that were remarkable and innovative in evoking
its monumentality, its layered history and its
dominant situation.

Our appreciation and understanding of Bellotto’s
distinctive achievements and art-historical
importance had significantly deepened since the
1990s: archival research and connoisseurship had
established his early reputation and prodigious
talents, while research on his career as a European
court artist at a time of political and artistic change
had generated many recent exhibitions. Bellotto
had emerged from the shadow of Canaletto

and of the Venetian context of his youth to be
regarded as an outstanding artist in his own right
who developed a highly original style, and whose
greatest artistic legacy was his series of views of
Dresden, Pirna and Königstein.
While there was a wonderful range of works from
the artist’s early career in the UK, which were
extremely important for our understanding of
Plate 8 The Fortress of Königstein from the North by
Bernardo Bellotto
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

37

how Bellotto gained an identity independent
from Canaletto, this painting was exceptional as it
showed Bellotto to be an innovative and brilliant
artist in a European context. Of the last four
Königstein scenes remaining in the UK, this was
the best, not only in terms of Bellotto’s treatment
of the Saxon landscape but also for his poetic
response to history and architecture.
The applicant disagreed that the painting met the
Waverley criteria. They had stated in a written
submission that although the painting had been in
the UK since the late-18th or early-19th century,
it had not formed part of any important national
collection. Indeed, the painting and its companion,
The Fortress of Königstein from the South, had
languished for some 200 years in relative obscurity.
The paintings had been infrequently published and
not included in any exhibition devoted to Bellotto’s
work. The painting had not been the subject of
scholarly debate or discussion in this country nor
had there been any interest in tracing its British
provenance, or in bringing it to a wider audience.
The UK already enjoyed a rich holding of works by
Bernardo Bellotto, both in public institutions and
private hands, a number of which can be said to
be of greater aesthetic significance and historical
interest than this painting. The finest of these were
the two complementary views in Manchester.
The exceptional view of Königstein in Washington
by far surpassed in quality and importance this
work and had been studied in detail (by Edgar
Peters Bowron, in Bernardo Bellotto: The Fortress
of Königstein, Washington, 1993), with the result
that this painting would not significantly advance
the understanding of the artist’s works, his place in
the history of 18th-century vedute painting, or our
knowledge of the Königstein series as a whole.
It must also be noted that the aesthetic
significance of The Fortress of Königstein from
the North was compromised by the uneven
condition of the painting.
We heard this case in October 2016 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of Bellotto, military prowess, dynastic
strength and enlightened rule. We recommended
that the decision on the export licence application
should be deferred for an initial period of three
months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
38

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Plate 8 (detail) The Fortress of Königstein from the North
by Bernardo Bellotto

at the fair matching price of £11,000,000. We
further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the painting, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
six months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by The National Gallery to
raise funds to purchase the painting. A decision
on the export licence application was deferred
for a further six months. We were subsequently
informed that the painting had been purchased by
The National Gallery for the sum of £11,670,000
(£670,000 more than the fair matching price we
had recommended) with assistance from the Art
Fund, the American Friends of the National Gallery
and the National Gallery Trust, and other individual
donors, trusts and foundations. The National
Gallery reported at the time that the acquisition
of this painting was so important to it that it was
willing to try and fund the additional costs which
the owner had asked for to compensate them
partially for the fall in the value of Sterling since the
date they had bought the painting.
Currency fluctuations are not taken into account
by the Committee as it sets the matching price
in Pound Sterling. Overseas purchasers should be
aware that if they purchase any object which might
satisfy the Waverley criteria, there is a likelihood
that an export licence will be deferred as part of
the UK’s normal export control procedures. It is
then for exporters to mitigate their exposure to the
consequences of currency fluctuations.

Case 11 A Dutch Girl at Breakfast
by Jean-Étienne Liotard
Painted in oil on canvas by Jean-Étienne Liotard
(1702–89) circa 1755–56, and measuring
46.8cm by 39cm.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to the Netherlands. The value shown on the
export licence application was £4,405,000, which
represented the hammer price paid at auction, plus
buyer’s premium.
The Director of The National Gallery, acting as
expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
painting under the first and second Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life and it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that A Dutch Girl at Breakfast was a rare
example of Liotard painting in oil and was closely
connected with British history and national life.
Following Liotard’s exhibition in London in 1773,
the painting remained in Britain for over two
centuries. Liotard’s great friend and patron Sir
William Ponsonby, 2nd Earl of Bessborough, who
amassed more than 70 works by the artist during
his lifetime, bought A Dutch Girl at Breakfast
at Christie’s on 16 April 1774. This relationship
represented one of the most important
associations between a British aristocrat and a
contemporary artist. Furthermore, the painting’s
early history in London reflected the city’s growing
dominance in the European art market at the end of
the 18th Century, while its recent history hanging
on the walls of The National Gallery between 2002
and 2016 had made it the only openly accessible
work by Liotard in Britain.
The expert adviser also stated this painting
met the second Waverley criterion due to its
outstanding aesthetic importance and nearimpeccable condition. The meticulous handling
of paint epitomised Liotard’s theories of art: his
best-known maxim was that a picture should have
‘point de touches’ (no visible mark-making). In
this, A Dutch Girl at Breakfast displayed Liotard’s
ability to imitate different surfaces and textures,
from the sophisticated rendering of the painting on
the back wall, to the extraordinary reflections of
the coffee service in the table-top. The painting’s
subject matter was unique in Liotard’s oeuvre.
Within Britain, its genre and medium make it highly
unusual: there were no genre scenes by Liotard in

British public collections, and the vast majority of
his works in this country were either miniatures
or pastels, many of which, sadly, did not share this
picture’s extremely high quality.
In their written submission, the applicant, the
Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam on behalf of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, had maintained
that the painting did not meet the first or second
Waverley criteria, and argued for mitigating
circumstances should it be considered to meet the
third. Regarding the first criterion, the applicant
stated that after its acquisition by the 2nd Earl
of Bessborough in London in 1774, there was no
known mention of the work until its publication in
E Humbert, A Revilliod and JWR Tilanus: La Vie et
Les Oeuvres de Jean-Étienne Liotard, Amsterdam,
1897. This placed it either at Bessborough House
in County Kilkenny or at Bishopscourt in County
Kildare (both now in the Republic of Ireland). It had
also been shown only once in public during the
20th Century. It had remained largely unknown
outside the specialist literature until deposited on
loan at The National Gallery, London, from 2002
to 2015.
Regarding the second criterion, the applicant
stated that within Liotard’s own oeuvre, it cannot
be compared to the pastel known as La Belle
Chocolatière at Dresden, or to the View of the
Massif of Mont-Blanc with Self-Portrait in the
Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam. Also, Liotard’s works in
oil were generally considered inferior to his pastels.
Furthermore, the painting fell short of the works by
Dutch 17th-century masters, such as Metsu and Ter
Borch, to which it paid homage.
Regarding the third criterion, the applicant
contended that Liotard’s A Dutch Girl at Breakfast
could be most fruitfully studied in the context
of the publicly accessible collections of the
Rijksmuseum. The reference collection held at the
Rijksmuseum consisted of 22 works by Liotard –
including Liotard’s portrait of the painting’s first
owner, the 2nd Earl of Bessborough – which had a
direct provenance from the artist via his eldest son
and a granddaughter.
We heard this case in October 2016 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that the
painting did not meet any of the Waverley criteria
and recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

39

Case 12 Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’
First Day’s Vase
This vase was thrown by Josiah Wedgwood
(1730–95) and Thomas Bentley (1731–80) at the
Etruria factory then decorated in the Bentley and
Wedgwood workshop in London, in 1769.
Based on ancient Greek pottery, oviform with
curved upright loop handles, decorated in orangered encaustic enamel with three classical figures
above a titled frieze inscribed ‘Artes Etruriae and
renascuntur.’, the other side inscribed in encaustic
enamel ‘JUNE XIII .MDCC.LXIX./One of the first
Days Productions/at/Etruria in Staffordshire,/
by/Wedgwood and Bentley.’, above a band of
palmettes, the neck moulded with bosses and
decorated with a band of grass, the cover with
a band of anthemion around a knop finial
measuring 25.4cm.
The applicant had applied to export the vase to
the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £482,500, which represented the
hammer price at auction plus buyer’s premium.
The Senior Curator and Head of Ceramics & Glass,
Department of Sculpture, Metalwork, Ceramics
and Glass, Victoria and Albert Museum, acting as
expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
vase under the first, second and third Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it was
of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of Josiah
Wedgwood, the modernisation of Wedgwood vase
production at the Etruria factory and the British
Industrial Revolution.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the ‘Black Basaltes’,
‘encaustic’-decorated ‘First Day’s Vase’ was thrown
in 1769 by Josiah Wedgwood and Thomas Bentley
at the Etruria factory and decorated almost
certainly by William Hopkins Craft, the most
skilled enamel painter in their London workshop.
The expert adviser stated the First Day’s Vase was
one of only four surviving vases made by Josiah

Plate 9 Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase
40

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Wedgwood in person, working in partnership
with Thomas Bentley on the opening day of their
new factory Etruria, on 13 June 1769. This iconic
vase was of great national importance. Made by
one of the country’s great heroes of the industrial
revolution, it could be seen to represent the birth of
one of the nation’s most important industries, one
which was to dominate the area around Stoke-onTrent for over 200 years.
The First Day’s Vases were crucial for the
understanding of Wedgwood’s drive to modernise
his production and to market his fine wares to a
rapidly expanding, style-conscious clientele. The
vases were the only products known to have been
thrown by Josiah Wedgwood himself, and the very
first vases made at his model factory Etruria. The
decoration was painted by hand in Wedgwood and
Bentley’s London decorating workshop, and the
design on each of the four remaining vases was
slightly different.
The applicant disagreed that the vase met the
Waverley criteria. They had stated in a written
submission that although the First Day’s Vases
were of historical significance, the particular vase
in question was not unique, being one of four, and
was not so closely connected with our history
and national life that its departure would be a
misfortune.
The First Day’s Vase in question was exquisitely
beautiful, but its quality was in line with other
pieces produced by Wedgwood and Bentley
at that time. Part of its aesthetic importance
was intrinsically bound up with its historical
significance, and without this commemorative
importance it was no more significant aesthetically
than any of the other fine pieces of the time.
The First Day’s Vases embodied the culmination of
countless scientific experiments to perfect both
the ‘Black Basaltes’ body, and the recipe for the
encaustic enamel, but once perfected, this ‘Black
Basaltes’ body with encaustic decoration was used
with the same degree of perfection on other pieces.

The figural decoration was derived from a plate
in the first volume of d’Hancarville’s catalogue
of Sir William Hamilton’s vases, Antiquities,
Etrusques, Grecques et Romaines. This was an early
documented use of this source, but its use was not
outstanding aesthetically as the Hamilton source
was used for other pieces of equal aesthetic quality
at this time.
All three of the other First Day’s Vases were
publicly accessible in museums, and were available
for study. A fourth example would not represent a
significant addition to this.
We heard this case in November 2016 when the
vase was shown to us. We found that it met the first
and second Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our
history and national life and it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of two months to
allow an offer to purchase to be made at the fair
matching price of £482,500 (plus VAT of £16,500).
We further recommended that if, by the end of
the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser
had shown a serious intention to raise funds with
a view to making an offer to purchase the vase, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
four months. After careful consideration, the
Minister decided that the initial deferral period
should be three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by The Potteries Museum
& Art Gallery to raise funds to purchase the vase.
A decision on the export licence application was
deferred for a further four months. We were
subsequently informed that the vase had been
purchased by The Potteries Museum & Art Gallery
with assistance from the Art Fund, the ACE/V&A
Purchase Grant Fund and the National Heritage
Memorial Fund.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

41

Case 13 Mughal sapphireand ruby-inset huqqa set
This circa mid-18th-century silver huqqa set
for smoking tobacco through scented water
is partly gilt, decorated throughout in enamel
(mostly blue, but also green and, on the base,
purple) and set with white sapphires and rubies.
Made up of five separate parts – 1) globular base,
height 16.9cm; 2) tobacco bowl, height 9cm,
and 3) cover, height 7cm; 4) ring, height 5cm;
5) mouthpiece, height 6.5cm – the maker
is unknown.

The applicant had applied to export the huqqa set
to Qatar. The value shown on the export licence
application was £240,000, which represented
an estimated value based on a June 2015
insurance valuation.
The applicant explained that since the last time this
item and the one following, the Mughal ruby- and
emerald-inset flask (case 14) had appeared before
our predecessors on 20 September 2004 (reported
as cases 12 and 13 in our 2004–05 annual report),
when both had been found to meet the Waverley
criteria and the then owner had withdrawn the
applications once serious expressions of interest
had been made, the identity of the owner had
changed. The new owner had collaborated with the
Victoria and Albert Museum and had placed both
items on loan at that museum for long periods. The
applicant stated that the current owner very much
42

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

regretted the previous withdrawal of the export
licence application on the part of the previous
owner, an act which it said it accepted ran contrary
to the spirit of the export control system.
The Head of the South and Southeast Asia Section,
Department of Asia at The British Museum, acting
as expert adviser, had objected to the export of
the huqqa set under the first and third Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life and
it was of outstanding significance for the study of
Mughal court arts – gold and silver-smithing, jewelsetting, enamelling – and the place of tobacco
in the social etiquette of early modern India and
its adoption by British administrators in the later
18th Century.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the huqqa set had a
well-established provenance in this country
reaching back to only a few decades after its likely
production. It belonged to Robert Clive (1725–74),
‘Clive of India’, and then passed to his son Edward,
1st Earl of Powis, and then to his descendants. From
the correspondence of the first Lady Clive, it can
be deduced it was already in this country in 1766,
while it was certain to have been in Britain from
1775 as it was clearly recorded in an inventory of
Lord Clive’s estate following his death the year
before. Since that time it had remained in the
possession of the Clive family and, from 1987, had
been exhibited at Powis Castle (the Clive/Herbert
house), which, since 1952, had been in the care of
the National Trust. This information meant it was
possible to extrapolate dates for the many more
undated examples of Lucknow enamelling. The fact
the set was complete only added to its importance.
Furthermore, the set was notable as the bowl was
of the earlier globular type, rather than the later
and more common bell-shaped type.
The close link between the set and Robert
Clive made it extremely important in terms of
understanding the complex history of British
engagement with India. Its beauty, as well as its
utility, spoke forcefully of the relationships being
formed in the 18th Century between Britain and
India. The huqqa set shed light upon the Mughal
courts and their successors in a time of great
political and economic turbulence. The collapse of
the mighty Mughal Empire in the 18th Century and
the establishment of both regional and colonial
powers was the backdrop to the production of this
beautiful and extravagant object.

The expert adviser noted that the Powis threepiece huqqa set (with a bell-shaped base),
referenced by the applicant, was not comparable
to the item under consideration. As the base was
bell-shaped, the huqqa set was approximately 80
years older than the set under consideration and
very unlikely to be connected with Clive.
The applicant disagreed that the huqqa set met
the Waverley criteria. There was no information
at all about how and when it was acquired by Lord
Clive, whether it was specially commissioned for
him, or whether it was given to him. It was certainly
the only one of the two items under consideration
that was contemporaneous with Clive’s period in
India, so a personal link was possible. There was,
however, another three-piece set of similar style,
workmanship and period that still remained with
the family and was formerly on loan from them to
Powis Castle.
The huqqa set was a classic example of something
which had a powerful initial impact but which on
closer inspection did not live up to it. The stones
were sapphires, not diamonds. The enamelling
was not as fine as one would have expected for a
piece from India of this period. Also the blue on the
body of each piece, which was of a very impressive
intensity and clarity, was damaged with bits
missing and replaced by blue paint. It could not
therefore be of outstanding aesthetic significance.
There was a second example that remained at
Powis, also gem-set on a blue enamel ground.
The form of each element here was well attested
in collections in the UK and the decoration was
generic. The significance of this set, therefore,
was not ‘outstanding’ to any branch of art,
learning or history.

Plate 10 and detail Mughal sapphire- and ruby-inset
huqqa set

We heard this case in November 2016 when the
huqqa set was shown to us. We found that it
met the first and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected
with our history and national life and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Mughal
court arts (gold- and silver-smithing, jewel-setting,
enamelling) and the place of tobacco in the social
etiquette of early modern India and its adoption
by British administrators in the later 18th Century.
The applicant having assured us that the owner
would accept a matching offer, we recommended
that the decision on the export licence application
should be deferred for an initial period of two
months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £240,000 (plus VAT
of £48,000). We further recommended that if, by
the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the huqqa set, the deferral period should be
extended by a further three months. After careful
consideration, the Minister decided the initial
deferral period should be three months.
During the initial deferral period a serious
expression of interest to raise funds to make
a matching offer for the huqqa set at the fair
matching price of £240,000 was made by a public
body. A decision on the export licence application
was deferred for a further three months. Shortly
after that the owner concluded that it did not
wish to sell the huqqa set. The Secretary of State
therefore decided to refuse an export licence.
This is in accordance with the published guidelines
to exporters.
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

43

Case 14 Mughal rubyand emerald-inset flask
This unique 17th-century inscribed wine flask
made of jade, lined with silver, and set with rubies
and emeralds, the stopper decorated with niello,
and within the neck a grill of gold, set with a ruby,
is thought to date from the reign (1605–27) of
the Mughal Emperor Jahangir.
The applicant had applied to export the flask to
Qatar. The value shown on the export licence
application was £6,000,000, which represented
an estimated value, based on a June 2015
insurance valuation.
The applicant explained that since the last time this
item, and the one before, the Mughal sapphire- and
ruby-inset huqqa set (case 13) had appeared before
our predecessors on 20 September 2004 (reported
as cases 12 and 13 in our 2004–05 annual report),
when both had been found to meet the Waverley
criteria and the then owner had withdrawn the
applications once serious expressions of interest
had been made, the identity of the owner had
changed. The new owner had collaborated with the
Victoria and Albert Museum and had placed both
items on loan at that museum for long periods. The
applicant stated that the current owner very much
regretted the previous withdrawal of the export
licence applications on the part of the previous
owner, an act which it said it accepted ran contrary
to the spirit of the export control system.
The Head of South and Southeast Asia Section,
Department of Asia at The British Museum, acting
as expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
flask under the first, second and third Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it was
of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of the
‘histories’ of Indian objects in Britain.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the flask was a magnificent
indicator of the sumptuous court life of the
Mughal emperors. The assembly of silver (interior),

44

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

jade, emeralds, rubies and gold was a very
striking combination. The message it conveyed
was of a lifestyle of great sophistication and
internationalism. Jade vessels and objects were still
of comparatively recent appearance at the Mughal
court in the reign of Jahangir (1605–27). The raw
material came from Khotan in western China and
jade was only known in India from the reign of
Akbar, the father of Jahangir.
From a technical point of view, the flask was a tour
de force given that the individual plates of jade
had to be separately measured and made to fit the
shape of the inner silver vessel. Jade could only be
abraded not cut, so the construction of such an
item was a matter of great technical virtuosity. On
the base, an inscription provided information, in
Persian and in tola, of the weight.
The flask was unique, there was no other object like
it anywhere in the world, let alone in Britain. It was
of outstanding importance as it intersected with
so many different narratives – Mughal political and
technical history; the consumption of wine and the
history of viniculture; British expansion in India;
gift-giving; the reception and treasuring of Indian
objects in Britain, and the passage of these rare
survivals down through families, providing long
provenances for objects that had, otherwise, been
dispersed or broken up.
The likely history of the flask as a gift to Lord
Clive in the aftermath of the Battle of Plassey
referenced the culture of gift-giving using precious
stones and gems, a practice well understood in the
Mughal court but found bewilderingly tempting to
the British when they encountered it in the 18th
Century. The flask provided a rare window into this
element of Indian history. It was also a reminder of
the morality of the actions of ‘the Nabobs’ (British
soldiers and administrators in the 18th Century
who made huge fortunes while in India), which was
questioned at that time and since. Clive himself
was the subject of judicial investigation when he
returned to London, as were other key figures in the
story of British India.

Furthermore, the flask clearly spoke about a
moment of importance in the narrative that bound
India and Britain together, a topic as relevant today
as it was in the 18th Century. This was an object
coming from a princely treasury and acquired by
a soldier fighting for a trading company (Clive and
the East India Company) at the moment when
commercial power shifted, ineluctably in the
subcontinent, to political power.
The applicant did not disagree that the flask met
the Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in November 2016 when the
flask was shown to us. We found that it met the
first, second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected
with our history and national life, it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Mughal
political and technical history, the consumption of
wine and gift-giving in Mughal India, Clive of India
and the British expansion in India. The applicant
having assured us that the owner would accept
a matching offer, we recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of four months
to allow an offer to purchase to be made at the
fair matching price of £6,000,000 (plus VAT of
£1,200,000). We further recommended that if, by
the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the flask, the deferral period should be extended by
a further six months.
During the initial deferral period a serious
expression of interest to raise funds to make a
matching offer for the flask at the fair matching
price of £6,000,000 was made by a public body.
A decision on the export licence application was
deferred for a further six months. Shortly after that
the owner concluded that it did not wish to sell the
flask. The Secretary of State therefore decided to
refuse an export licence. This is in accordance with
the published guidelines to exporters.

Plate 11 Mughal ruby- and emerald-inset flask
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

45

46

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Case 15 Virgin and Child with Saint
Mary Magdalen and the Infant Saint
John the Baptist by Parmigianino
This painting by Girolamo Francesco Maria
Mazzola, called Parmigianino (1503–40), dates
from circa 1535–40. Oil on paper, laid on panel, it
measures 75.5cm by 59.7cm.
A seated Madonna in a pink and blue gown –
positioned to the right of the composition – looks
down at the standing Christ Child and holds his
left arm. The Child in turn looks towards the young
Saint John the Baptist whose hands are together in
prayer. Behind the Christ Child, and supporting him,
was a seated young woman, almost certainly Mary
Magdalene; she was identified by the jewellery
chest in the foreground. What was probably her
assumption appeared in the top left – behind the
verdant landscape and stream, and above a rocky
outcrop – in the form of a figure atop a cloud. The
work was in excellent, almost pristine condition.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £24,500,000, which represented
an agreed purchase price subject to the granting of
an export licence.
The Director of The National Gallery, assisted by
the Curator of 16th-Century Italian Paintings,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the export
of the painting under the first and second Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life and it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that Virgin and Child with
Saint Mary Magdalen and the Infant Saint John
the Baptist was a rare example of a religious easel
painting from the last decade of Parmigianino’s
short life. Characteristic of the more highly finished
paintings of his late years, it was one of the finest
specimens by the artist remaining in private hands,
beautifully painted and notable for the vivid and
detailed rendering of the landscape. Furthermore,

its iconography was highly unusual and merited
further study. In superb condition, it had been
painted on paper, a support which may not have
been as unusual in the 16th Century as previously
thought, but of which only a few examples had
been identified.
The work had been in the United Kingdom for
nearly 250 years and was one of the first paintings
by Parmigianino to be bought by a British collector.
Acquired from the Barberini Collection in Rome and
imported into Britain by the Scottish dealer Gavin
Hamilton, it subsequently formed part of three
distinguished collections of Italian Renaissance
paintings in this country.
The applicant agreed that the painting met the
second and third Waverley criteria, but suggested it
did not meet the first Waverley criterion.
We heard this case in December 2016 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of Parmigianino’s oeuvre
and the practice of painting on paper in the 16th
Century, which had yet to be fully understood.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an initial
period of four months to allow an offer to purchase
to be made at the fair matching price of £24,500,000
(plus VAT of £196,000). We further recommended
that if, by the end of the initial deferral period, a
potential purchaser had shown a serious intention
to raise funds with a view to making an offer to
purchase the painting, the deferral period should be
extended by a further six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the painting had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 12 Virgin and Child with Saint Mary Magdalen and
the Infant Saint John the Baptist by Parmigianino
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

47

Case 16 Part of the Refectory of Walsingham
Abbey by John Sell Cotman
Circa 1807–08, this watercolour over
graphite sketch, on paper, by John Sell Cotman
(1782–1842) measures 29.4cm by 45.2cm.
The applicant had applied to export the watercolour to
Canada. The value shown on the export licence application
was £350,200, which represented the hammer price
at auction, plus buyer’s premium and VAT of £11,700.
The Keeper, Department of Prints and Drawings, The
British Museum, acting as expert adviser, had objected to
the export of the watercolour under the third Waverley
criterion on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the works of John Sell
Cotman, and the significance of the watercolour to
the history and development of Romantic landscape
painting in the early 19th Century.
The expert adviser had provided a written submission
stating that Part of the Refectory of Walsingham
Abbey was without question one of Cotman’s most
ambitious, striking and unusual watercolours of
medieval architecture. This was a field in which he
specialised, especially in his early career up to 1811, the
period generally considered to be his most successful.
Walsingham Abbey, though painted three or four years
previously, was the only one of the large subjects in
the 1811 exhibition of the Norwich Society of Artists
which anticipated the Norfolk etchings and was thus
chosen by Cotman as a demonstration of the full
extent of his abilities and a sign of what was to come.
Walsingham Abbey was unusual in Cotman’s
watercolours of this size because it did not contain
figures and the view was represented as he found it.
The falling light highlighted the contrast between the
white stone tracery of the windows and the large plain
cubic block on the left. The auction sale catalogue
entry described this as lime mortar for the building of
the new house in 1806. This watercolour therefore also
provided an important historical record of the building
on this internationally significant site of pilgrimage.
Cotman’s treatment of the subject of Walsingham
Abbey was astonishingly original in the way he
combined the depiction of the medieval ruin with
the evidence of current construction work. Such
awareness of the processes of historical change
applied to the topographical and picturesque
tradition was normally identified as belonging to
JMW Turner’s Picturesque Views in England and Wales,
executed around 20 years later. Such a radical gesture
was never repeated in Cotman’s own work.
Walsingham Abbey had one final claim to ‘outstanding
significance’, and that was in its condition. Of all these
large watercolours already mentioned, none match
48

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

the bright, pristine state of Walsingham Abbey. The
importance of the original owner, the banker Francis
Gibson of Saffron Walden, as a patron of Cotman’s
work was outlined in the sale catalogue. What was
not discussed was the esteem in which this work
was held during the ‘rediscovery’ of Cotman in the
late 19th and early 20th Centuries. It was shown in
the Burlington Fine Arts Club 1888 exhibition that
reintroduced his work to a London audience and
collectors, where it appeared in reviews in the same
sentence as the iconic Greta Bridge, lauded as an
example of his skill as an architectural draughtsman
and colourist, preserving breadth and distinction of
mass of form through light, shade and colour.
The applicant disagreed that the watercolour
met the Waverley criteria. Regarding the first
Waverley criterion, the applicant had stated that
the composition had long been known through
reproduction but it had not entered the national
psyche in the way that other examples of Cotman’s
work had done. The most important were now in
The British Museum, where a significant number of
works were held and described as a ‘comprehensive
collection’. The Victoria and Albert Museum held
approximately 124 works, Cecil Higgins Art Gallery in
Bedford and Norwich Castle Museum & Art Gallery
held significant collections, while Leeds Art Gallery
had the largest number of works by Cotman in what
was described as ‘a nationally significant collection’.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion, the applicant
had stated that the most successful works by Cotman
were those in which a single powerful shape, such as that
of a bridge or a Romanesque arch, contrasted starkly
with the sky or stood out against a dark woodland or a
shadowy interior. The Walsingham Abbey watercolour
employed all Cotman’s skills as an observer of light,
colour and form, but the subject was of insufficient
strength to make it a masterpiece.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, the applicant
had stated that the work was a good example of
watercolour painting from the heyday of the art, but
it was not unique. Technically it was very similar to
other examples in public ownership. Students of the
history of watercolour had access to a significant
number of works of similar quality in public and
university collections in Britain. The subject of the
drawing was not of outstanding importance from an
archaeological or architectural point of view since the
building remained standing.
We heard this case in December 2016 when the
watercolour was shown to us. We found that the
watercolour did not meet any of the Waverley criteria
and recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Case 17 George III mahogany wheel
barometer by John Whitehurst
The dial, silvered, signed ‘Whitehurst Derby’ with
three-inch scale for 29-31 inches of mercury is
subdivided into hundredths and inscribed for
changeable, rain and fair, in a mahogany case,
carved with leaves, column (housing the tube)
with acanthus leaves at base, and urn finial. Made
by Whitehurst of Derby, circa 1770–80, it is 43
inches high, 14 inches wide and 2.25 inches deep.
The applicant had applied to export the wheel
barometer to the USA. The value shown on the
export licence application was £220,000, which
represented the selling price of the item.
The Acting Keeper of Science Collections at the
Science Museum, London, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the barometer
under the second Waverley criterion on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance.
The expert had provided a written submission
stating that the wheel barometer had been made
by Whitehurst of Derby, circa 1770–80. It met
the second Waverley criterion as it was a very
fine scientific instrument by a renowned family
of instrument-makers. It was one of only nine of
its type known, none of which (to the best of the
expert adviser’s knowledge) were housed in a UK
public collection.
The wheel type of barometer (originally described
by Robert Hooke in Micrographia, 1665, but not
in widespread circulation during the 17th or early
18th Centuries) had become more prevalent by
the late 18th Century as it was possible to make
them more accurate. Mahogany was generally
used for cases as it was resistant to cracking and
warping, and had a pleasing colour. During the
reign of King George III, natural philosophy had
become increasingly popular, with scientific
instruments finding their way into the homes
of the elite classes; the ornate decoration of the
wheel barometer in question indicated that it was
intended for this purpose.
This barometer was one of a small number of
this design known to have been made by the
Whitehurst family of Derby, clockmakers and
scientific instrument-makers trading at 22
Irongate, Derby. The expert adviser noted that it
was difficult to determine with certainty which
member of the family made this type of barometer,
as John Whitehurst (1713–88) spent much of the
late 1770s moving between Derby and London,
eventually settling in London permanently.

Plate 13 George III mahogany wheel barometer by
John Whitehurst

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

49

In his absence, the firm was run by his wife’s
cousin James Wright, his brother James and his
nephew John, to whom he eventually bequeathed
the business. This type of wheel barometer was
that for which the Whitehurst family name was
best known.
This possible association with John made this item
of particular interest. As a clockmaker, instrumentmaker and natural philosopher, he was widely
known in Derby and was painted by Joseph Wright.
He was a member of the Lunar Society and made
equipment for Matthew Boulton. He later became
Stamper of Money Weights at the Mint. His
geological research saw him elected a Fellow of the
Royal Society.
The applicant disagreed that the wheel barometer
met the Waverley criteria. The applicant stated
that the barometer was one of a group of
barometers of the same type and by no means
a unique item.
We heard this case in February 2016 when the
wheel barometer was shown to us. We found
that it met the third Waverley criterion on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the Whitehurst
family’s work.

Plate 13 (detail) George III mahogany
wheel barometer by John Whitehurst
50

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

We were unable to make a recommendation on a
fair matching price based on the information that
had been provided to us and we asked for further
evidence to substantiate the sale asking price on
the licence.
The applicant submitted a new export licence
application in December 2016 with a revised
value of £160,000 (net of VAT), which represented
an agreed sale price subject to the granting of
an export licence. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of two months to
allow an offer to purchase to be made at the fair
matching price of £160,000 (plus VAT of £2,000).
We further recommended that if, by the end of
the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser
had shown a serious intention to raise funds with
a view to making an offer to purchase the wheel
barometer, the deferral period should be extended
by a further three months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the wheel barometer had been made and
we were not aware of any serious intention to raise
funds. An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

51

Case 18 English gilt bronze, painted
and cast iron railings
This case comprises two sets of railings, each
of three sections, made of wrought and cast
iron, painted black, with gilt iron and gilt bronze
decoration, each set having a central section and
two flanking sections. The railings were made in
the 1720s by Jean Montigny and modified in the
1740s. They were further modified and restored
in 1989–92 to good condition. Each section is
236cm high by 230cm wide and 45cm deep,
including supporting plinths.
The applicant had applied to export the railings to
Belgium. The value shown on the export licence
application was £305,000 (plus VAT of £61,000),
which represented the total price paid by the owner
for the two sets (one was purchased at auction
for £185,000, which represented hammer price
plus buyer’s premium; the other was purchased
after the auction for £120,000, which represented
purchase price plus buyer’s premium).

levels of sophistication by 1700 with the arrival of
Jean Tijou, examples of whose work can be seen at
Chatsworth, Derbyshire (supplied with assistance
from Montigny), and Hampton Court Palace.
Montigny worked with Tijou and succeeded to his
workshop. The present railings were of particular
interest as their designer and maker, Montigny, was
of French birth and training. The association with
Cannons had been questioned but the connection
with Chesterfield House was indisputable. The
railings presented an important source for the
study of British patronage of the highest quality
ironwork, as well as of metalwork design and
decorative techniques and subsequent structural
and decorative modifications.

The Deputy Keeper, Department of Sculpture,
Metalwork, Ceramics and Glass, Victoria and Albert
Museum, accompanied by the Senior Curator,
Ironwork & French Sculpture 1600–1914, Victoria
and Albert Museum, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the railings under
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that their departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because they were of outstanding
aesthetic importance and they were of outstanding
significance for the study of the history of ironwork.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the railings made of
wrought and cast iron, painted black, with gilt
iron and gilt bronze decoration, were among
the most lavish examples in Britain and were
important for the study of the history of ironwork.
They illustrated an integral aspect of British
18th-century architectural patronage and the
role of ironwork in communicating social status.
Designating the perimeter of the central residence
of 4th Earl of Chesterfield, the ‘Chesterfield House
railings’ were intended to impress on arrival and to
be viewed by the patron and his guests from within
the front ground floor reception rooms. Their
design and execution was of outstanding quality
and of outstanding aesthetic significance.
The railings were probably supplied in the 1720s
by Jean Montigny for the first Duke of Chandos,
most likely for his country estate Cannons, in
Middlesex. Following the Duke’s bankruptcy, they
were acquired for Chesterfield House, London, for
which they were modified in the late 1740s. The
production of wrought iron in Britain achieved new
52

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

The applicant disagreed that the railings met the
Waverley criteria. The applicant had stated in a
written submission that although these railings
clearly had an important connection with the Duke
of Chandos and Cannons, a great number of other
objects commissioned by the Duke for Cannons
were testament to his wealth and importance. It
was hard to see how these railings were ingrained
in British national life, as they were French in taste
and design and were most likely executed by a
French emigré craftsman at odds with most British
ironwork of this time.
While impressive in scale and design, these
railings were not in their original condition and
their current manifestation had been adapted for
commercial means. Having been removed from
Chesterfield House, the railings were kept in a
barn at Harewood and fell into serious disrepair.
Subsequently an extensive series of restoration
works was undertaken to make the railings as
commercially attractive as possible rather than to
return them to their original state.

Plate 14 and detail English gilt bronze, painted
and cast iron railings

The attribution of the railings to Jean Montigny
was based on their obvious quality and the fact
that Montigny worked for the Duke of Chandos
at Cannons. Unfortunately, however, it was
impossible to prove this attribution. The set of
six railings had been significantly restored and
adapted, and as the Devonshire House gates were
a better example of Montigny’s work (and could be
firmly attributed to him), they did not believe that
these were outstanding examples for the study of
early 18th-century ironwork or Montigny’s oeuvre.
We heard this case in March 2017 when the railings
were shown to us. We noted that the railings had
been sold in July 2016 as two separate lots. Each lot
consisted of three panels comprised of one central
decorative panel flanked by two plainer panels. We
agreed that these two lots were part of a greater
whole that had been installed at Chesterfield
House in the 1740s and that all six railings met the
Waverley criteria as one set. We found that they
met the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that their departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because they were of outstanding
aesthetic importance and they were of outstanding

significance for the study of evidence of the impact
of French architectural ornament on the London
palaces of wealthy Francophile, English patrons;
design and execution of distinguished late-Baroque
iron and bronze work; and the contribution of
French-trained ironmasters to English high-style
tradition. We recommended that the decision on
the export licence application should be deferred
for an initial period of three months to allow an
offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £305,000 (plus VAT of £61,000). We
further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the railings, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention to raise funds to purchase
the railings. A decision on the export licence
application was deferred for a further three
months. At the end of the second deferral period,
no offer to purchase the railings had been made.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

53

Case 19 Meissen figure
of ‘Pulcinell’
This Meissen Böttger stoneware figure of
‘Pulcinell’ (16.4cm high, 85.cm wide, 8.2cm deep)
from the Commedia dell’arte, partly polished and
with original colouring, dates from circa 1710–13.
The item was formerly owned by Emma Budge, a
Jewish art collector from Hamburg. Following her
death on 14 February 1937, the Nazi authorities
seized her entire collection and took it to Berlin in
August 1937. The extensive private collection was
sold at two auctions held at Paul Graupe’s Berlin
auction house in 1937. This piece was lot 779. The
Nazis replaced the executors of her will with their
own and instead of being handed over to Emma
Budge’s heirs, the proceeds of the auction were
paid into blocked accounts where they remained
‘in safekeeping’ for the Third Reich. Emma’s heirs
never received any of the money. At the sale,
this figure was bought by the art dealer Isaac
Rosenbaum for 3500 Reichsmark. Rosenbaum was
a trusted adviser to Mrs Budge and somehow (the
precise details are lost) he must have passed or
sold the piece to his friend and business associate
Arthur Kauffmann.
Arthur Kauffmann was Managing Director of the
Frankfurt branch of the Hugo Helbing fine art
auction house and a prominent member of the
Jewish community, and he was on the board of the
Frankfurt Jewish Museum. He fled Nazi Germany
in April 1938, having sent his children ahead of
him, and it is assumed that he brought the figure
to England at this time where it remained until its
recent sale.
Given that the export licensing regime is subject
to a legal obligation of confidentiality, information
received pursuant to a licence application cannot
be passed to third parties and therefore the
Secretary of State is prohibited from passing on
the details of export applications even where
spoliation during the Nazi era may be relevant.
The terms of reference of the Spoliation Advisory
Panel also preclude it from considering a claim for
an item which is privately owned unless it is at the
joint request of the claimant and the owner. In the
absence of any spoliation claim, the Secretary of
State asked us to consider the object in the normal
way and advise on whether the object met any of
the Waverley criteria.
The applicant had applied to export the figure
to Japan. The value shown on the export licence
application was £270,000, which represented
the agreed sale price subject to the granting of
an export licence.

54

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

The Keeper of Ceramics, The Bowes Museum,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the
export of the figure under the second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it
was of outstanding significance for the study of
Böttger stoneware.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that due to its contraposto
pose and superior modelling, the figure had an
excellent claim to be considered of outstanding
aesthetic importance. It was made by a factory
which was regarded as one of the leading 18thcentury ceramic factories, not least because it had
the reputation of being the first factory in Europe
to make true hard-paste porcelain in the manner of
the Chinese.
The subject matter was significant as the figure
was the very first of what became a genre:
the Commedia dell’arte figure – leading to the
recognisable porcelain figures of Harlequin,
Columbine, Pantaloon and so on of the mid- to late18th Century.
The expert adviser stated that, in his opinion, the
United Kingdom had good but not outstanding
collections of Meissen porcelain and stoneware
in a number of institutions but relatively little of
the ‘top class’ wares that circulated among the
crowned heads and great European aristocratic
families at the time (the Hanbury Williams service
of 1748–50 at Alnwick Castle was perhaps the
exception that proved the rule). In general, British
collections were weak in those items of elaborate
design, craftsmanship, ingenuity and skill that
represented the very best of royal patronage or
‘princely magnificence’ that can be seen to best
advantage in the former royal palaces of Vienna,
Munich, Russia and Dresden.
The applicant had stated in a written submission
that the figure did have some significance to the
study of Meissen figures and Böttger stoneware.
The applicant provided further provenance
information that had recently come to light:
Emma Budge Collection.
Sold in the Emma Budge Sale, Paul Graupe, Berlin,
27 to 29 September 1937, Lot 779. Bought by
Rosenbaum for RM 3500 [estimate 1500].
Isaac Rosenbaum to Arthur Kauffman. By descent.

We heard this case in December 2016 when the
figure was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of Meissen porcelain and 18thcentury sculpture. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of four months to
allow an offer to purchase to be made at the fair
matching price of £270,000 (plus £4,500 VAT).
We further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the figure,
the deferral period should be extended by
a further three months.

be returned to the Budge Estate. Aware that
the Spoliation Advisory Panel can only consider
claims for objects in private collections where the
private owner is a party to a joint request for such
consideration, the Budge Estate lawyers indicated
that they would welcome consideration of this
matter by that Panel and asked the Department to
pass on this proposal to the owner, which was done.
No joint approach was made to the Spoliation
Advisory Panel and given that no offer to purchase
the figure had been made and we were not aware
of any serious intention to raise funds at the end
of the initial deferral period, an export licence
was issued.

Following the announcement of the
export deferral of the Meissen figure,
the Secretary of State was contacted by
the law office representing the estate of
Emma Budge. They asserted that the 1937
sale of this object was a direct result of antiSemitic persecution under the Nazi regime
and that the object should therefore

Plate 15 Meissen figure of ‘Pulcinell’

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

55

Case 20 Terre de faïence vase,
Tripode, Picasso
Pablo Picasso (1881–1973)’s tripod vase, Tripode
or Françoise leaning on her hands, made in 1951, is
white earthenware, thrown elements, decorated
with oxides, white glaze. Edition number inscribed
35/75, with marks: ‘MADOURA PLEIN FEU /
EDITION PICASSO’. Height 75.5cm.
The applicant had applied to export the vase to
the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £218,027.13, which represented
the hammer price paid by the owner at auction plus
the buyer’s premium and artist’s resale royalty.
The Senior Curator, Ceramics and Glass, Victoria
and Albert Museum, acting as expert adviser, had
objected to the export of the vase under the first
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our
history and national life and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of Picasso’s ceramics, and
of artist ceramics more broadly.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that Tripode was a substantial
piece and that it stood as an iconic example of
Picasso’s ceramic editions made in collaboration
with the Madoura pottery. The idea of producing
editioned pieces, probably proposed to Picasso by
Suzanne Ramié, was embraced readily by the artist,
and such works formed a substantial and significant
part of his ceramic output. The cultural value of
editioned pieces should not be underestimated.
Furthermore, this piece counted among the most

56

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

significant works in the Attenborough collection,
a pre-eminent collection of Picasso editions, and it
featured prominently in the auction catalogue as
well as in reports of the sale.
Picasso’s ceramics fell broadly into three
categories: unique works with painted or incised
passages in the artist’s hand, applied either to
standard Madoura pottery shapes or forms
produced to Picasso’s specifications; pieces
produced from models or moulds worked by
Picasso with incised or applied relief, marked
Empreinte Originale and produced in small editions
(comparable to an original print), as is represented
in the next case (21), and editioned works produced
by the pottery following original designs by the
artist, like this one.
From the early 1950s, Picasso began on occasion
to utilise vessels that Suzanne Ramié had
designed for sale at the pottery, and these were
sometimes turned into editions. In this instance,
Picasso decorated the front and back of the pot
with depictions of his partner, Françoise Gilot.
The front view used two of the three tripod legs
to suggest her arms, upon which she rested her
head, an attitude captured in a photograph of
Gilot with two of Picasso’s original versions of the
pots. While other examples of Picasso’s ceramics
were arguably of greater aesthetic significance,
there could be no doubt that Tripode was among
the most iconic examples of his ceramic work
and the special relationship between Picasso and
the Madoura factory. The standing of Picasso’s

ceramics within the canon of his artistic output had
increased steadily and markedly in recent decades.
Bought by Lord Richard and Lady Sheila
Attenborough at the Madoura pottery before
1960, this example from the edition also reflected
the pleasure they took in collecting Picasso’s
works. Evidently a much-loved piece, it could be
seen sitting between the couple in photographs
taken in the Attenboroughs’ home. Shown in the
2007 exhibition of their collection at Leicester’s
New Walk Museum and Art Gallery, the pot was
subsequently returned to the Attenboroughs. It
was, nevertheless, included in the comprehensive
catalogue of their collection published by New
Walk Museum and Art Gallery in 2011. It was
easy to overlook the value of Picasso’s editioned
work, which merited serious attention both in
aesthetic terms and in its significance as a means of
disseminating the artist’s work. Picasso’s ceramics
were only modestly represented in British public
collections. No comparable examples were present
in any public collection or among the works from
the Attenborough collection that remained on loan
to Leicester.
The applicant disagreed that the vase met the
Waverley criteria. Regarding the first Waverley
criterion, although the applicant acknowledged the
important role Lord and Lady Attenborough played
in British society, they stated that the present
piece itself had little connection to our national
life. The ceramic was created in France having been
designed by a Spanish artist. The present ceramic

had never been on long-term public display,
having only been exhibited publicly briefly in
Leicester in 2007.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated that Picasso’s connection to the
piece was tenuous. The work was an Edition Picasso,
which meant that Picasso created a prototype and
then workers at the Madoura pottery would have
created the edition by painting further ceramics in
imitation of Picasso’s original. The present ceramic
was not in better condition than examples of the
same edition that have come to the market in
recent years.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated that there was extensive literature
on this work, both from the catalogue raisonné of
Alain Ramié and the book on the Attenborough
collection by Marilyn McCully. The applicant did
not believe that further information could be
gained by scholars viewing the work in person than
could be gleaned from the literature that was easily
accessible to all. Furthermore, this ceramic came
up for sale regularly (approximately once a year at
Sotheby’s London) and was readily available on the
open market.
We heard this case in April 2017 when the vase was
shown to us. We found that the vase did not meet
any of the Waverley criteria and recommended
that an export licence be issued. An export licence
was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

57

Case 21 Terre de faïence vase,
Oiseaux et Poissons, Picasso
Oiseaux et Poissons / Birds and Fish is a large vase
from 1955 in white earthenware with red slip,
press-moulded using moulds with decoration
incised by Pablo Picasso, edition number 19/25
incised in black (Empreinte Originale); marks:
‘MADOURA PLEIN FEU / EMPREINTE ORIGINALE
DE PICASSO’. Height: 49cm.
The applicant had applied to export the vase to
Switzerland. The value shown on the export licence
application was £186,027.13, which represented
the hammer price paid by the owner at auction plus
the buyer’s premium and artist’s resale royalty.
The Senior Curator, Ceramics and Glass, Victoria
and Albert Museum, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the vase under the
first, second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected
with our history and national life, it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Picasso’s
ceramics, and of artist ceramics more broadly.

Picasso himself. During the mid-1950s, a number
of large-scale pots were produced as Empreintes
Originales in short editions of around 25. Of these,
Birds and Fish was the first to be based on a large
wide-bellied vase form, almost 50cm in height.
Plaster moulds were taken from the original form,
into which Picasso incised decoration by hand,
this being directly reproduced as positive relief
in the finished ceramic pieces. Made using white
earthenware, the decoration was highlighted
with red slip. Characteristic of Picasso’s witty and
inventive designs, its playful positioning of the
birds and fish in relation to the vase’s bulbous form
immediately suggested the idea of swimming fish
with birds flying above.

The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that Birds and Fish counted
among the most significant works in the
Attenborough collection, and the vase featured
prominently in the auction catalogue as well as in
reports of the sale.

Bought by the Attenboroughs at Madoura on
11 September 1965, Birds and Fish was among the
most substantial and significant works in their
collection to have been acquired directly from
the pottery. Shown in the 2007 exhibition of their
collection at Leicester’s New Walk Museum & Art
Gallery, the vase was subsequently returned to
the Attenboroughs’ home. It was, nevertheless,
included in the comprehensive catalogue of their
collection published by New Walk Museum &
Art Gallery in 2011. It is likely that a further vase
from the edition of 25 was the ‘Grand Vase aux
Poissons’ shown in the 1957 Arts Council exhibition
of Picasso’s ceramics, strengthening the work’s
association with British audiences.

It was an exceptional example of Picasso’s
Empreintes Originales – direct ‘original’
reproductions made using moulds worked upon by

The idea of producing editioned pieces, probably
proposed to Picasso by Suzanne Ramié, was
embraced readily by the artist, and such works

58

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

formed a substantial and significant part of his
ceramic output. Among these, the Empreintes
Originales hold a particularly important place,
representing an innovative method of working
developed in order to preserve the direct
impression of the artist’s hand. It was easy to
overlook the value of the editioned work, which
merited serious attention both in aesthetic terms
and in its significance as a means of disseminating
the artist’s work.
Picasso’s ceramics were only modestly represented
in British public collections. A handful of unique
and editioned pieces were present at the Victoria
and Albert Museum, National Museums Scotland
and National Museum Wales. No major Empreintes
Originales were present. Nor did directly
comparable examples exist among the works from
the Attenborough collection that remained on loan
to Leicester.
When questioned about the research value of
this particular piece, as an Empreinte Originale,
the expert replied there was much that could be
learned from close analysis of the object as this
was as close to the artist’s hand as an edition
could be. In response to the suggestion that the
motifs did not appear to be part of Picasso’s usual
repertoire, the expert replied that birds and fish
were a common motif in Picasso’s work and an
example of the artist contemporising the ancient.
The applicant disagreed that the vase met the
Waverley criteria. Regarding the first Waverley
criterion, the applicant stated that, although

they acknowledged the importance of the
Attenborough provenance and the important
role Lord and Lady Attenborough played in
British society, the present piece itself had little
connection to our national life. The ceramic was
created in France after being designed by a Spanish
artist and had never been on long-term public
display, having only been exhibited publicly twice.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated that Picasso’s connection
to the piece was tenuous. This work was an
Empreinte Originale and the design of this piece,
with less interesting motifs and colours, was
not aesthetically connected with people’s idea
of Picasso or his biographical art history. The
applicant considered that this piece was not
among Picasso’s most attractive ceramics.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated that despite having been from
a relatively small edition of 25, this ceramic had
come up for auction six times since 2010 at various
auction houses worldwide and was, consequently,
readily available. There was extensive literature,
both from the catalogue raisonné of Alain Ramié
and the book on the Attenborough collection by
Marilyn McCully. Therefore, viewing this ceramic in
person did not offer a unique opportunity for study.
We heard this case in April 2017 when the vase
was shown to us. We found that the vase did
not meet any of the Waverley criteria and
recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

59

Case 22 Glasgow School clock designed by
Margaret and Frances Macdonald
This silver, white metal and walnut Glasgow
School clock was designed in 1896 by Margaret
Macdonald (1864–1933) and Frances Macdonald
(1873–1921), sponsored by Thomas Ross and
Sons. The clock face has repoussé decoration
depicting infants clutching at dandelions to
signify the passing of time; the weights depicting
owls and birds respectively. Clock face measures
28.5cm by 28cm; mark of TR & S Glasgow
hallmarks for 1896.
The applicant had applied to export the clock to
the USA. The value shown on the export licence
application was £182,500, which represented the
hammer price paid by the owner at auction plus the
buyer’s premium.
The Deputy Keeper, Victoria and Albert Museum,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the
export of the clock under the third Waverley
criterion on the grounds that its departure from
the UK would be a misfortune because it was
of outstanding significance for the study of the
decorative arts in the United Kingdom at the turn
of the 20th Century.
The expert adviser stated in a written submission that
this was an important Glasgow School clock, designed
by Margaret Macdonald and Frances Macdonald,
and sponsored by Thomas Ross and Sons 1896. This

60

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

clock was an example of a collaboration between
the two Macdonald sisters and was exhibited in the
London Arts and Crafts exhibition in 1896.
Metalwork by the Macdonald sisters, either
individually or collaboratively, was extremely
rare. From both careers, only some 17 items
survived (in addition to this clock). The clock under
consideration belonged to their most productive
period of metalworking. Not only did the sisters
design their metalwork but they also made the
individual pieces. There did not appear to have
been a clear division of responsibilities in the
production of their work; both were skilled at
design and manufacture.
Frances and Margaret were part of the ‘Glasgow
Four’ with their husbands Herbert McNair and
Charles Rennie Mackintosh respectively. Their
unique vision was a fusion of a wide variety of
influences and artistic styles owing something to
the Pre-Raphaelites, Aestheticism, the Arts and
Crafts movement, the Celtic revival, Japonisme
and the emerging European Art Nouveau, as well
as being infused by Symbolism, mythology, the
sinuous linearity of the work of Aubrey Beardsley,
and Jan Toorop during his Symbolist phase. It was
the nearest Britain came to an Art Nouveau style
that it could call distinctively its own but with its

own, unique Scottish identity. Although at best it
received a lukewarm reception at the time, even in
Glasgow, it was enthusiastically followed by some
of the European avant-garde.
In the late 19th Century the position of women
in society was slowly changing. Education
opened up new possibilities, not least in the
art schools which held out the possibility of a
financially independent career. The Arts and Crafts
Movement, founded by William Morris with his
socialist ideals, fostered this, although not without
conservative resistance from society at large.
Once married, women were expected to assume
a subservient role, and while the reputation of
Mackintosh had steadily grown over the course
of the 20th Century, his wife’s had tended to be
eclipsed, although this would not have been the
intention of Mackintosh himself.
McNair found his own position more difficult to
reconcile. Long after his wife’s death and with his
own career in evident decline, he burnt most of
his wife’s designs and watercolours, making her
contribution rather difficult to assess. Recent
scholarship had made progress in reassessing the
contribution of the Macdonald sisters. This clock of
1896 by the Macdonald sisters provided important,
objective evidence of their significant reputations

and its export was therefore objected to under the
third Waverley criteria.
The applicant disagreed that the clock met the
Waverley criteria: the timepiece was not a key work
in the study of this area and its departure from
the UK would not inhibit further study. According
to the Doves and Dreams exhibition catalogue of
2006, there were 52 examples of metalwork by
the Glasgow Four in existence, of which 10 were in
UK public collections. Another 33 works had been
identified but were untraced.
Three clocks had been identified as having been
designed by the Glasgow Four, one of which was
untraced and referred to in The Studio Magazine
Vol. II 1897 (p.91), and another of which was brass
and in a private collection in the US. The remaining
example was the one under consideration. Other
items produced by the Glasgow Four were not
restricted to any one type of object but included
frames, brooches, panels, candlesticks, sconces,
pendants, a hair-comb, tea caddy and spoon, a
cruet, sugar tongs, a vinaigrette and buckle.
We heard this case in April 2016 when the clock
was shown to us. We found that the clock did
not meet any of the Waverley criteria and
recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

61

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Appendices

62

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Appendix A
Report on additional funding
for acquisitions
UK public institutions, regrettably, have very limited
acquisition funds. We are extremely grateful, as
always, for the external funding provided towards
purchasing items placed under deferral as a result
of recommendations we have made. The money
provided by the main funding bodies for all acquisitions
of cultural objects is listed below, and the tables in
Appendix H give specific details of the funding received
for export-deferred items.

Year

National Heritage Heritage Lottery
Memorial Fund
Fund (museums
(£ millions)
/galleries)
(£ millions)

Heritage
Lottery Fund
(manuscripts
/archives)
(£ millions)

Total
(£ millions)

Total adjusted for
inflation as per
2017 (£ millions)
approximate*

2007–08

9.40

1.10

1.60

12.10

15.35

2008–09

13.79

1.12

0.32

15.23

19.42

2009–10

4.01

0.36

0.04

4.41

5.38

2010–11

12.34

0.69

0.26

13.29

15.4

2011–12

4.99

6.04

0.11

11.14

12.51

2012–13

4.69

10.48

0.70

15.87

17.29

2013–14

6.54

16.31

0.019

22.87

24.34

2014–15

5.30

7.64

(1.62)

12.94

13.64

2015–16

4.62

5.42

(0.12)

10.04

10.77

2016–17

4.68

18.87

(0.34)

23.55

23.55

* Figures based on the Bank of England Inflation Calculator for illustrative purposes only:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/education/Pages/resources/inflationtools/calculator/index1.aspx
Please note from 2014–15 the HLF funding museum/galleries is reported as inclusive of
funding for manuscripts/archives

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

63

National Heritage Memorial Fund and Heritage Lottery Fund spend on acquisitions
2007–08 to 2016–17
25

20

15

10

5

0

07–08

08–09

09–10

10–11

11–12

13–14

14–15

15–16

16–17

National Heritage Memorial Fund)

Heritage Lottery Fund (museums/galleries)

Heritage Lottery Fund (manuscripts/archives)

Total

Main funding bodies
i) National Heritage Memorial Fund
The National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF), set up
under the National Heritage Act 1980 in memory of the
people who gave their lives for the UK, acts as a fund
of last resort to provide financial assistance towards
the acquisition, preservation and maintenance of land,
buildings, works of art and other objects which are of
outstanding importance to the national heritage and are
under threat. The NHMF’s grant-in-aid since 2010–11 has
been £5 million per annum and, where necessary, it can
use its endowment fund for exceptional cases.
NHMF has funded two export-stopped items this year:
National Museums Scotland acquired the fourth of a set
of four William Burges vases; the third of this set was
export-stopped last year and National Museum Wales
successfully acquired it with the aid of an NHMF grant.
It also funded a spectacular Wedgwood Black ‘Basaltes’
First Day’s Vase, thrown by Josiah Wedgwood himself. The
Potteries Museum and Art Gallery will be adding this to
their world class collection of ceramics.
Away from export-deferred items, this year the NHMF
funded a broad sweep of the nation’s heritage. It
supported the acquisition of a 1930s fairground ride for
the Fairground Heritage Trust; Gunter Mansion, a building
that contains a hidden 17th-century chapel, and an
exquisite miniature of the 16th-century poet Lord Herbert
of Cherbury. Its acquisition by the National Trust will
allow it to remain on display in Powis Castle.
64

12–13

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

Another artwork secured for the nation was Sir Thomas
Lawrence’s Portrait of Sir Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of
York. The acquisition of this unusual work has allowed the
National Portrait Gallery to add a major portrait of the
Duke to their collection; an ambition it has held since its
foundation in 1856.

ii) Heritage Lottery Fund
The Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF) is the largest funder of
the UK’s heritage, with a current projection of circa £400
million a year to distribute. As in previous years, there has
been a spread of acquisitions of portable heritage from
archives and fine art/sculpture through to archaeology.
HLF was not asked to support any export-deferred items
in the reporting year and none have so far been grantaided in the current financial year.
The largest award, £7.4 million, was to the National
Maritime Museum for the acquisition of the Armada
Portrait of Elizabeth I. The portrait, sold by descendants
of Sir Francis Drake, commemorates the most famous
conflict of Elizabeth’s reign (1558–1603), the failed
invasion of England by the Spanish Armada in summer
1588, and portrays a queen at the height of her power.
HLF also helped the National Galleries of Scotland secure
the iconic Scottish painting The Monarch of the Glen, with
an award of £2.75 million. This 19th-century painting by
Sir Edwin Landseer will be in public ownership for the first
time since it was completed in 1851, and will hang in the
Scottish National Gallery for six months before going on
tour across Scotland.

HLF continued to support regional museums and archives
with acquisitions. York Civic Trust acquired the only
known, and indeed earliest, work by Grinling Gibbons to
have survived from the woodcarver’s early years in York,
a narrative high relief celebrating Psalm 150 with King
David playing a harp and Saint Cecilia playing an organ.
Derby Museums successfully acquired Joseph Wright’s
Arkwright’s Mills and Willersley Castle through auction
in New York. Both paintings are of the landscape and
industry around Cromford and will fill the gap in Derby’s
collections of paintings of the artist’s native Derbyshire.
Other notable acquisitions include that by the Royal
Albert Memorial Museum in Exeter of the Seaton Down
Hoard, the largest Roman coin hoard found in Devon
and the third largest collection of coinage to be found
in the UK, and the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford of the
Watlington Hoard, seen as one of the most significant
finds of Viking material in the last 20 years for the light it
sheds on the alliance between Alfred the Great’s Wessex
and Coenwulf II’s Mercia. The Horniman acquired through
auction three historic keyboard instruments from the
celebrated Finchcocks Musical Museum, which are an
important addition to the Horniman’s internationally
renowned musical instrument collection and will go
on permanent public display in its Music Gallery from
mid-2019. Details of awards for the acquisition of exportdeferred items are in Appendix H (page 80).

iii) Art Fund
Art Fund is the national fundraising charity for art,
helping to increase the range and quality of art in
public collections across the UK. In 2016–17, Art Fund
contributed towards the acquisition of two items placed
under temporary deferral. These were The Fortress of
Königstein from the North by Bernardo Bellotto and a
Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase. Details are at
Appendix H.

iv) ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
The ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund assists the collections
of non-national museums, galleries, specialist libraries
and record offices in England and Wales. In 2016–17, the
ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund offered support towards
the acquisition of one item placed under temporary
deferral: a Wedgwood ‘Black Basaltes’ First Day’s Vase.

v) National Fund for Acquisitions
The National Fund for Acquisitions (NFA), administered by
National Museums Scotland with Scottish Government
funding, contributes towards the acquisition of objects
for the collections of non-national museums, galleries,
libraries and archives in Scotland.
In 2016–17, the NFA made 64 payments totalling
£131,525, enabling 31 organisations to make acquisitions
with a total purchase value of £372,860. At 31 March 2017,

a further 11 grants totalling £33,418 had been committed
but not yet paid.
The NFA was not asked to support any export-deferred
items in the reporting year and none have so far been
requested in the current financial year.

vi) Acceptance in Lieu and the Cultural Gifts
Scheme
Acceptance in Lieu enables UK taxpayers to transfer
important works of art and other important heritage
objects into public ownership while paying Inheritance
Tax, or one of its earlier forms. The taxpayer is given the
full open-market value of the item.
The Cultural Gifts Scheme enables UK taxpayers to
donate important works of art and heritage objects to
the nation during their lifetime. Donors receive a tax
reduction based on a set percentage of the value of the
object they are donating – this is 30 per cent where the
donor is an individual and 20 per cent where the donor
is a company.
In 2016–17, 44 Acceptance in Lieu and Cultural Gifts
Scheme cases were completed, resulting in almost
£40 million-worth of important cultural property being
secured for the nation. Details are in the Acceptance in
Lieu and Cultural Gifts Scheme 2016–17 Annual Report,
available on Arts Council England’s website.

vii) Private treaty sales
If a heritage object is sold on the open market, the vendor
may be liable to Capital Gains Tax and Inheritance Tax.
However, these tax charges are not incurred if an owner
sells the object by private treaty to a body (for example,
a museum or gallery) listed under Schedule 3 to the
Inheritance Tax Act 1984. Qualifying heritage objects
include any previously granted conditional exemption
or an item which would qualify as of pre-eminent
importance. This dispensation was extended in April
2009 to Corporation Tax on companies’ chargeable gains.
This is an advantageous arrangement because a public
collection will need to raise less purchase funds than
would have been paid under normal arrangements to the
extent of a proportion of the tax (usually 75 per cent) that
would otherwise have been chargeable. As an incentive
to vendors to offer qualifying heritage objects first to
British public collections, the remaining proportion of the
tax (usually 25 per cent) that would otherwise have been
chargeable may be retained by the vendor.
Schedule 3 to the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 lists those
museums which are able to benefit from a ‘douceur’
when acquiring works of art that are subject to either
Inheritance Tax, Capital Gains Tax or Corporation
Tax on sale.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

65

Advisory Council on the Export of
Works of Art and Objects of Cultural
Interest
Many different branches of art and learning have an
interest in the export of cultural objects and all the issues
associated with it, as do many different UK institutions.
They cannot all be represented on the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest, but their knowledge and advice is
valuable. The original Waverley Committee therefore
recommended the creation of a widely representative
Advisory Council, which would meet from time to time,
as circumstances might require, to discuss matters of
common interest and the operation of the system as a
whole. It was envisaged that the Council would advise
whether the right standards were being applied to
the different categories of objects, as well as enabling
institutions (not least regional ones) and the art trade to
make their views known.
Members of the Council include the expert advisers
who refer objects to the Reviewing Committee (and are
normally appointed by the Secretary of State for Digital,
Culture, Media & Sport as ‘champions’ for their retention
when the decision on the export licence is deferred),
as well as representatives of the institutions seeking to
acquire deferred items, of grant-making bodies, of the art
trade and of interested associations (see Appendix I for
full details).
The Advisory Council is normally convened annually and
met most recently on 14 June 2017. The main focus of this
year’s meeting was on cases where an application had
been withdrawn either when there was good prospect
of an institution raising the required funds, or when the
whole matching sum had been raised. The Council also
considered the draft policy section of the Reviewing
Committee’s Annual Report for 2016–17. Its comments
have been fully considered and are reflected in this text.

Manuscripts, documents and archives
The Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents and
Archives is a sub-committee of the Reviewing Committee.
Its terms of reference were revised in 2005 and are
as follows:
‘To consider the present arrangements for the export
control of manuscripts, documents and archives, and the
sources of funds available (to UK institutions) for their
acquisition and to make recommendations resulting from
this consideration.’
For membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts,
Documents and Archives, see Appendix K.
The Working Party usually meets annually, although
it may meet more frequently if necessary. It met most
66

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

recently on 18 May 2017 when it considered the proposed
revised explanatory note on marginalia, the duty of
expert advisers to confer with local authorities for locally
important manuscripts, and the requirement of copies of
documents and manuscripts.
The Working Party then looked at sources of financial
help for the acquisition of manuscripts, documents and
archives. Written reports had been submitted by the
ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund, the PRISM Fund, the
Friends of the National Libraries, the Secretary of the
Acceptance in Lieu Panel and The National Archives sales
catalogue monitoring service. The Heritage Lottery Fund
and National Heritage Memorial Fund provided details of
funding towards archival and manuscript material.

i) ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
During 2016–17, the ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
considered 16 cases in respect of manuscripts, documents
and archival photographs, and offered 13 grants totalling
£110,386, enabling purchases amounting to £282,225 to
go ahead. Items purchased ranged from an 18th-century
chart of Newfoundland, surveyed by Lieutenant (later
Captain) Cook in 1776, bought by the Captain Cook
Memorial Museum in Whitby, to an archive relating to the
development of Heston Aerodrome between 1921 and
1936, acquired by the Royal Institute of British Architects
Library in London.

ii) PRISM Fund
The PRISM Fund supports the acquisition and
conservation of material relating to all fields of the history
of science, technology, industry and medicine. During
2016–17, no grants were made towards the acquisition
and conservation of archival or similar material.

iii) Friends of the National Libraries
The Friends assist various institutions primarily by
promoting the acquisition of printed books, manuscripts
and records of historical, literary, artistic, architectural
and musical interest. In 2016, the Friends made or
committed 35 grants, totalling £122,410 from the
Operating Fund, and £50,987 from the restricted funds.
Over £140,000 was awarded to university libraries,
county record offices and smaller institutions.

iv) Heritage Lottery Fund and National
Heritage Memorial Fund
In 2016–17, the Heritage Lottery Fund committed
£336,400 to the archives sector for the acquisition and
conservation of manuscripts and documents, while the
National Heritage Memorial Fund made no awards over
the same period. The recipients of the HLF grants ranged
from the Northumberland Archives for their purchase
of the archives of Dickson, Archer & Thorp solicitors
(the most prominent county solicitors in 19th-century

Northumberland) to The University of West London
for the cataloguing and conservation of the archives of
Heathrow Airport.

v) Acceptance in Lieu
The Acceptance in Lieu (AIL) scheme is also an important
means of retaining archival material within the United
Kingdom. During 2016–17, there were five offers accepted
via the AIL mechanism which were either archives or
contained archival material. Items accepted ranged from
the archive of Denis Healey, Baron Healey (1917–2015), to
the archive of Sir Robert Edwards, who was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the development
of in vitro fertilisation.

The Working Party strongly endorses the work of these
funds, schemes and services, and expresses its thanks to
the advisers and administrators of all of them, who work
hard, often at very short notice, to enable applicants to
acquire material. It noted that the national endorsement
they provide to local institutions is often as valuable as
the financial assistance given.

Information on all works of art and the archives accepted
in lieu in 2016–17 can be found on Arts Council England’s
website at www.artscouncil.org.uk.

vi) The National Archives sales catalogue
monitoring service
The sales catalogue monitoring service, among its other
functions, notifies repositories when manuscripts and
archives become available for acquisition through public
sales. This service is greatly valued by repositories and the
Working Party commends the assistance it gives them.
In 2016–17, 89 items were purchased by 43 different
repositories as a result of notifications. However, there
were 24 unsuccessful bids as repositories were outbid or
dealers had already disposed of stock.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2016–17

67

