Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2017–18
Presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 10 (1) (a) of the Export Control Act 2002

April 2019

© Crown copyright 2019
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government
Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you
will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
enquiries@culture.gov.uk
ISBN 978-1-5286-0947-0
CCS1218242248

04/19

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office

Cover image Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac), Salvador Dalí
and Edward James

Export of Objects
of Cultural Interest
2017–18
1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018
I

Report of the Secretary of State

II	Report of the Reviewing Committee on
the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

3

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Annual report to Parliament
By the Secretary of State
for Digital, Culture,
Media & Sport

4

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

The Reviewing Committee on the
Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
I am pleased to lay before Parliament the 14th annual
report on the operation of the export controls on objects
of cultural interest, as required by the Export Control
Act 2002. The report covers the period 1 May 2017 to 30
April 2018 and is the 64th year that the Government has
published the annual report of the Reviewing Committee.
The UK’s export control system has always sought to
strike a balance, as fairly as possible, between allowing
the majority of cultural objects to be freely exported and
providing an opportunity to identify the most exceptional
items and provide an opportunity for a UK buyer to
acquire them. It is thanks to the excellent efforts of the
Reviewing Committee and its expert advisers that we are
broadly successful in meeting that aim.
The Committee has once again had a busy year,
identifying 12 objects, collectively worth £61.6 million,
as meeting the Waverley criteria and which were
subsequently placed under export-deferral. Seven were
eventually saved and now enrich collections around the
UK. All of the export-deferred items are outstanding in
their own way but several are particularly worthy of note.
The Palladian baby house is one of only around 30
surviving examples of pre-1760 English baby houses.
Jessie Burton’s best-selling 2014 book The Miniaturist,
which was also made into a BBC drama, has brought baby
houses to renewed attention in recent years. This fine
example was acquired by the V&A Museum of Childhood.
Another item which is small in scale but hugely important
is the rare bronze Roman figurine. It is extremely unusual
for portable art from this period of Roman rule to depict
a distinctively British character and the acquisition by
Chelmsford Museum will offer an important new glimpse
into the clothing of our Romano-British ancestors.

The Lobster Telephone, Salvador Dalí and Edward James
deservedly features on the front cover of the annual
report. The Lobster Telephone, which was created in the
UK, was acquired by the National Galleries of Scotland
and cements its position as one of the world’s greatest
collections of Surrealist art. No less outstanding is the
Mae West Lips Sofa, also Dalí and James, which was
acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum.
As the Chairman of the Committee notes, a number
of recent cases encouraged us to take a fresh look
at the export-deferral process. In December 2018,
my Department issued a public consultation on
‘strengthening the process for retaining national
treasures’. The consultation outlines proposals to
introduce a legally binding mechanism – often referred
to as a ‘binding offers’ mechanism – so that owners of
cultural objects found to be national treasures, who have
confirmed that they are prepared to sell to a museum
or gallery or relevant private purchaser at an agreed fair
market price, are legally bound to follow through on their
commitment to do so. We are now considering the views
of respondents on these proposals.
I would like to thank Sir Hayden Phillips for his excellent
chairing of the Committee and to the members for their
time and expertise. My thanks go out also to the expert
advisers and the many organisations and individuals
without whose help we would not have an opportunity
to save these wonderful items. Their continued efforts,
combined with our examination of the export-deferral
process, will ensure that our national treasures are
well protected.

Jeremy Wright MP
Secretary of State for Digital,
Culture, Media & Sport

Left George I Palladian baby house (front view)
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

5

Operation of the Control
The following figures cover the period of this report (1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018).
1 May 2016 –
30 April 2017

1 May 2017 –
30 April 2018

10,941

10,858

(a)

Number of applications for individual export licences1

(b)

Number of above applications which were for manuscripts,
documents or archives

1,792

1,682

(c)

Number of items licensed after reference to expert advisers
on the question of national importance

27,398

27,300

(d)

Total value of items in (c)

£1,712,154,287

£1,564,927,630.15

(e)

Number of Open Individual Export Licences (OIEL) in operation
having been issued in previous years to regular exporters for the
export of (i) manuscripts, documents, archives and photographic
positives and negatives; (ii) objects imported into the UK in the
past 50 years; (iii) UK origin coins; (iv) the temporary export of
a Rolls-Royce; (v) the temporary export of objects owned or
under the control of national institutions or institutions holding
designated collections

67

64

(f)

Number of items licensed after the Export Licensing Unit
was satisfied of import into the UK within the past 50 years

22,585

10,534

(g)

Total value of items in (f)

£11,615,616,080

£13,438,786,425.30

(h)

Number of items in (f) which were manuscripts,
documents or archives

1,194

814

(i)

Total value of items in (h)

£138,836,939

£74,709,557.96

(j)

Number of items given an EU licence without reference to
the question of national importance because they were either:
valued at below the appropriate UK monetary limit2; owned by
a museum or gallery that had an OIEL; manuscripts valued at
£1,500 or less or coins valued at £500 or less and the exporter
held a valid OIEL; musical instruments exported for less than six
months for use in the course of work by a professional musician;
a motor vehicle exported for less than six months for social,
domestic or pleasure purposes; a foreign registered motor vehicle
exported following importation for less than six months for
pleasure purposes; imported into the UK in the last 50 years and
were being exported on a temporary basis

3,164

3,063

(k)

Total value of items in (j)

£2,245,429,545

£3,458,051,653.44

1

One application may cover several items.

2 	In some cases, an EU export licence may be required to export items that are valued below the
relevant UK monetary limit. In such cases, an EU licence will normally be given without referring
the licence application to the expert adviser on the question of national importance.
6

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Report of the Reviewing
Committee on the Export
of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018
To:
The Rt Hon Jeremy Wright MP,
Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

64th Report of
the Reviewing Committee

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

7

Reviewing Committee on the
Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest
Members of the Committee 2017–18
Sir Hayden Phillips (Chair)
Mr Peter Barber
Mr Richard Calvocoressi
Ms Philippa Glanville (appointment expired 1 April 2018)
Mr Lowell Libson
Mr Christopher Rowell
Ms Leslie Webster
Mr Aidan Weston-Lewis

Secretary
Mr Peter Rowlands

Postal Address
Secretary
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works
of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Arts Council England
21 Bloomsbury Street
London WC1B 3HF
A register of interests held by Committee members
is posted on Arts Council England’s website:
www.artscouncil.org.uk

8

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Contents
Report
Part I

Reviewing Committee Report for 2017–18

11

Part II

Operation of the Control

14

Individual export cases
2017–18
Case 1

The Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen, Switzerland by Joseph Anton Koch

18

Case 2

A Roman figurine of a man wearing a hooded cloak

20

Case 3

A portrait bust, Queen Victoria, by Alfred Gilbert

22

Case 4

Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson

24

Case 5

Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí and Edward James

26

Case 6

The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi by Francesco Guardi

30

Case 7

Ehrenbreitstein by Joseph Mallord William Turner

32

Case 8

La Leçon de Piano by Henri Matisse

34

Case 9

George I Palladian baby house

35

Case 10

Images from the Life (The Norman Album) by Julia Margaret Cameron

37

Case 11

The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host by John Martin

40

Case 12

Man’s silk/wool doublet

42

Case 13

Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac), Salvador Dalí and Edward James

43

Case 14

The Head of an African Man Wearing a Turban by Sir Peter Paul Rubens

46

Case 15

Mother and Child by Barbara Hepworth

48

2015–16
Case 18

Scottish seal matrix pair

48

Full list of plates available at Appendix L, page 72

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

9

Appendices
A

Report on additional funding for acquisitions

51

B

History of export controls in the UK

58

C	Terms of reference of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest
D	Membership of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of
Cultural Interest during 2017–18

60
60

E

List of independent assessors who attended meetings during 2017–18

62

F

Value of items placed under deferral (2008–09 to 2017–18)
i) for which permanent licences were issued, and
ii) where items were purchased by UK institutions or individuals

64

G	Items licensed for export after reference to expert advisers for advice as to national importance
1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018

65

H

Applications considered and deferred on the recommendation of the Reviewing Committee
on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest, 2008–09 to 2017–18

67

I

Composition of the Advisory Council on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest

69

J

Further reading

70

K

Membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents and Archives during 2017–18

71

L

Full list of plates

72

10

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Part I:

Reviewing Committee
Report for 2017–18
1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018
Introduction
Every year we are privileged to have a wide variety of
objects come before our Committee and this year has
been no exception.
Following the Reviewing Committee’s recommendation,
the Secretary of State put in place temporary exportdeferrals for cultural objects ranging from a rare George I
Palladian baby house designed to teach the teenage
daughters of wealthy families household management
– which we are pleased has been acquired by the V&A
Museum of Childhood where it will be enjoyed by further
generations of children – to a number of iconic Surrealist
items. The Mae West Lips Sofa (acquired by the Victoria
and Albert Museum) and the Lobster Telephone (White
Aphrodisiac) (acquired by National Galleries of Scotland),
both Salvador Dalí and Edward James, were part of the
most important Surrealist interiors ever created in this
country. The Committee also considered a selection of
flat art. An elegant and detailed preparatory drawing
of the Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen,
Switzerland by Joseph Anton Koch, discovered by the late
art critic Brian Sewell, now resides in The British Museum.
One of Francesco Guardi’s masterpieces, The Rialto Bridge
with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi, demonstrates why he is
considered one of the greatest Venetian view painters of
the 18th century: Guardi’s depictions of sunlight on the
Venetian canals and lagoon would go on to inspire future
generations of artists, not least Turner. Ehrenbreitstein
by Joseph Mallord William Turner shows the artist had
absorbed Guardi’s masterful ability to create atmosphere
through his own use of colour and light.
The aggregate value of the 12 cases for which you
accepted our recommendation that an export licence be
deferred was £61,558,441. These ranged in value from
£550 for a tiny hooded Roman figurine – which at 65mm
tall could comfortably fit in a matchbox – to £26,796,000
for the Guardi The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei
Camerlenghi. It is important to note that monetary
value is not indicative of national importance and the
Committee gives careful and considered thought as to
whether the item in front of it potentially meets one, or
more, of the Waverley criteria regardless of its price.
Last year we reported that the export licence application
for a sapphire-and-diamond coronet designed by Prince

Albert in 1840 for the young Queen Victoria – memorably
depicted in her official portrait by Winterhalter in 1842
and later worn to the State opening of Parliament in
1866 – had been withdrawn. Fortuitously, the coronet
was later acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum
through the generosity of a private benefactor. We are
particularly pleased to note in this reporting period
that the monumental marble sculpture bust by Alfred
Gilbert, depicting the widowed Queen-Empress at the
height of Britain’s global influence, has been acquired
by the Fitzwilliam Museum. It seems fitting that both
these items will be on display to the public in 2019 – the
bicentenary year of the birth of both Queen Victoria and
Prince Albert.

Tax-remitted compensating price
Due to the time constraints inherent in the deferral
system and the confidential nature of the amount of tax
payable on any particular sale, it is important that when
cases come before the Committee, this information is
either to hand or can be obtained quickly. It is critical for a
public museum that it be given this information as soon as
it begins the process of trying to raise the funds necessary
to make a compensating offer. If there are delays it
can prejudice the museum’s chances of successfully
concluding the purchase, which is why the provision of the
estimated net-of-tax price calculation is a precondition of
the release of the press announcement which starts the
deferral process.

Independent advice on valuations
It is recognised that in some cases there may be an
element of subjectivity in arriving at a market price when
an object is not the subject of a recent sale. To assist the
Committee in its task, which is to recommend a valuation
that is fair and reasonable to the owner and national
heritage interests alike, where the value is an estimated
price, applicants are required to provide, with their
submission, a justification of it by reference to the sale of
comparable objects. If we do not agree that the evidence
provided justifies the estimated valuation and a value
cannot be agreed by all parties, we normally recommend
that the Secretary of State seek an independent valuation
from valuers with recent market experience in the specific
field of the object.
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

11

Part I continued
During this reporting year we had one such case, Images
from the Life (The Norman Album) by Julia Margaret
Cameron, where we recommended to the Secretary
of State that he seek an independent valuation.
In this case the following process, which we consider as
establishing a useful and workable precedent, was agreed:
• o
 nce the Secretary of State has agreed the identity of
the independent valuer the owner is asked to confirm
whether they are content to be bound by that valuer’s
decision or whether they want to appoint their own
independent valuer;
• i n either case the letter of instruction to the
independent valuer is agreed beforehand by all parties;
• i f the owner wants to appoint their own independent
valuer, both valuers are advised that the other has been
instructed and they are asked to attempt to reach an
agreed value;
• i f the two valuers fail to agree a value the Secretary
of State is asked to appoint a third person to act as
an arbitrator (not as an expert) with the Reviewing
Committee Secretariat handling this.

Sales agreed in foreign currencies
Where a sale has been agreed in a foreign currency the
practice was for it to be changed to Pounds Sterling
(GBP£) using an average of the commercial exchange
rate for the date the sale was agreed. In two cases
in December 2008, at a time when the pound was
weakening, the date used was the date of the case
hearing and in other cases the date used has been the
date of the export licence application. There is no set
rule: given that the export licensing procedure may be an
interference with a person’s rights in their possessions,
each case has to be assessed on its merits, the aim being
to adopt the solution that is fairest to the applicant while
providing certainty to UK institutions that wish to raise
funds to make a matching offer.

Confidentiality
The Committee has received requests from those
involved in the export licensing process for a greater
degree of anonymity for buyers where the purchase
has not completed but is subject to the granting of an
export licence. We would like to emphasise that the
Committee’s proceedings are confidential and that there
is an expectation that confidentiality will be maintained
by all parties. The Committee’s current policy is that the
identity of those involved in the process should normally
be disclosed to the full Committee including independent
assessors. We are currently reconsidering this policy.

12

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

The practice of withdrawing licence
applications and the refusal of matching offers
We have on a number of previous occasions observed
that our export system is designed to strike a balance
between protecting our cultural heritage and individuals’
property rights. A number of recent cases, such as Portrait
of a Young Man in a Red Cap by Pontormo, persuaded the
Government to take a fresh look at all aspects of the
export-deferral process.
A public consultation on ‘strengthening the process for
retaining national treasures’ was launched in December
2018. The consultation outlined proposals to introduce
a legally binding mechanism—often referred to as a
‘binding offers’ mechanism—so that owners of cultural
objects found to be national treasures, who had confirmed
that they were prepared to sell to a museum or gallery or
relevant private purchaser at an agreed fair market price,
are legally bound to follow through on their commitment
to do so. Respondents were invited to submit their views
on these proposals by February 2019.

Independent assessors, expert advisers and the
administration of the system of export control
As in previous years, the permanent Committee members
wish to place on record their thanks to the large number of
specialists, academics and members of the art trade who
so generously give their time, adding to the Committee’s
depth of expertise by agreeing to join the Committee as
independent assessors.
The Committee also wishes to thank the expert
advisers for their vital expertise, time and commitment.
We appreciate that the preparation and presentation
of cases can be time consuming; however, the role they
all play is essential to the proper working of the system.
We would also like to thank the Department for Digital,
Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) , and the Secretariat to
the Committee and the Export Licensing Unit at the Arts
Council who administer the system on the Secretary of
State’s behalf.

Part I continued
Committee members
There was one change of membership during 2017–18
with the conclusion of Philippa Glanville’s second fouryear term. Her term of appointment expired on 1 April
2018. She is an acknowledged authority on silver and the
history of dining, and has been a diligent and dedicated
member of the Committee. While her expertise in her
field has been invaluable, as a historian she is able to
speak meaningfully about a wide range of objects,
adding context and depth to the Committee’s discussions
and deliberations. We would like to record our great
appreciation for her contribution over the last eight years.
A full list of members can be found at the beginning of this
report and brief biographies are included in Appendix D.

History and operation of the export
control system
A full history of export controls in the UK and their
rationale is in Appendix B. The terms of reference of the
Reviewing Committee are in Appendix C.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

13

Part II:

Operation of the Control
During the period covered by this report
(1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018):
• There were 10,858 applications for export licences
• 1
 ,682 of these applications were for the export of
manuscripts, documents or archives
• The applications covered a total of 40,897 items
• 2
 7,300 items with a value of £1.6 billion
(£1,564,927,630.15) were issued with export licences
after they had been referred to expert advisers
• 6
 4 Open Individual Export Licences (OIEL) were in
operation over this period: a) nine for the export of
manuscripts, documents, archives and photographic
positives and negatives; b) four for the export of goods
over 50 years of age imported into the UK within the
past 50 years; c) one for the export of UK origin coins; d)
one for the temporary export of a Rolls-Royce, and e) 49
for the temporary export of objects over 50 years of age
owned by or under the control of a national institution
or an institution holding a designated collection
• 1
 0,534 items with a value of £13.4 billion
(£13,438,786,425.30) were issued with export licences
after the Export Licensing Unit was satisfied that they
had been imported into the United Kingdom within the
past 50 years. Of these items with proof of import, 814
were manuscripts, documents or archives, with a total
value of £74,709,557.96
• 3
 ,063 items with a value of £3.5 billion
(£3,458,051,653.44) were given an EU licence without
reference to the question of national importance
because they were either: valued at below the
appropriate UK monetary limit; owned by a museum or
gallery that has an OIEL; manuscripts valued at £1,500
or less or coins valued at £500 or less and the exporter
holds a valid OIEL; musical instruments exported for
less than six months for use in the course of work by
a professional musician; motor vehicles exported for
less than six months for social, domestic or pleasure
purposes; foreign-registered motor vehicles exported
following importation for less than six months for
pleasure purposes, or imported into the UK in the last
50 years and being exported on a temporary basis

14

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Cases referred to the Committee
In 2017–18, 15 cases are being reported, which were
considered by the Committee because the appropriate
expert adviser had objected to the proposed export on the
grounds of national importance. This is a fraction of the
items covered by the export licensing system and shows
that expert advisers think very carefully before referring
cases to us.
The Committee will designate an object as a ‘national
treasure’ if it considers that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune on one or more of the
following three grounds, collectively known as the
Waverley criteria:

History

Aesthetics

Scholarship

Is it closely
connected
with our history
and national life?

Is it of outstanding
aesthetic
importance?

Is it of outstanding
significance for
the study of some
particular branch of
art, learning or history?

Waverley 1

Waverley 2

Waverley 3

Part II continued

Items found to be
national treasures
Thirteen items were found to meet at least one of the
Waverley criteria:
Case 1

T he Schmadribach Waterfall near
Lauterbrunnen, Switzerland by Joseph
Anton Koch

Case 2	A Roman figurine of a man wearing a
hooded cloak
Case 3

A portrait bust, Queen Victoria, by Alfred Gilbert

Case 4

Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson

Case 5	
Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí and
Edward James

Items where the licence application
was withdrawn following submission
to the Secretary of State
Following submission to the Secretary of State,
one case was withdrawn before an announcement
was made:
Case 15	
Mother and Child by Barbara Hepworth

Deferred items that were acquired
Of the 12 deferred items, the following seven
were acquired by institutions or individuals in
the United Kingdom:
Case 1

T he Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen,
Switzerland by Joseph Anton Koch

Case 6

T he Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei
Camerlenghi by Francesco Guardi

Case 2	A Roman figurine of a man wearing a
hooded cloak

Case 7

Ehrenbreitstein by Joseph Mallord
William Turner

Case 3

A portrait bust, Queen Victoria, by Alfred Gilbert

Case 4

Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson

Case 5

 ae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí and
M
Edward James

Case 9

George I Palladian baby house

Case 9	George I Palladian baby house
Case 10	
Images from the Life (The Norman Album) by
Julia Margaret Cameron
Case 11	
The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host by
John Martin
Case 13	
Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac), Salvador
Dalí and Edward James
Case 14	
The Head of an African Man Wearing a Turban by
Sir Peter Paul Rubens
Case 15	
Mother and Child by Barbara Hepworth

Items found not to be
national treasures
Two items were found not to meet any of the Waverley
criteria. They were:
Case 8

L a Leçon de Piano by Henri Matisse

Case 12	Man’s silk/wool doublet

National treasures referred
to the Secretary of State
Twelve cases were referred to the Secretary of
State where an announcement was made regarding
export deferral.
The aggregate value of the 12 deferred items was
£61.6 million (£61,558,440.79)

Case 13	Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac),
Salvador Dalí and Edward James
These had a total value of £3 million (£3,016,978.79),
which represents five per cent of the total value of objects
that were deferred.

National treasures that were
not saved
Unfortunately, it was not possible to retain in the UK
every national treasure that was deferred. Export licences
were (or can be) issued for the five items listed below:
Case 6	
The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei
Camerlenghi by Francesco Guardi		
Case 7	
Ehrenbreitstein by Joseph Mallord William Turner
Case 10 Images from the Life (The Norman Album)
by Julia Margaret Cameron
Case 11 The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host by John Martin
Case 14	
The Head of an African Man Wearing a Turban
by Sir Peter Paul Rubens
These have a collective value of £58.5 million (£58,541,462),
which represents 95 per cent of the total value of objects
placed under deferral and 42 per cent of the total number.
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

15

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Individual
export cases

Right Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson (detail)
16

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

17

Case 1 The Schmadribach Waterfall
near Lauterbrunnen, Switzerland
by Joseph Anton Koch
Joseph Anton Koch (1768–1839),
The Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen,
Switzerland (recto); a faint sketch of a
mountainous landscape (verso). Black chalk,
pen and black ink, lightly squared in black chalk,
indented for transfer, measuring 44.3cm
by 35.8cm. Probably dated 1793.
The applicant had applied to export the drawing
to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £68,750, which
represented the hammer price paid at auction plus
the buyer’s premium.
The Senior Curator of Paintings, Victoria and Albert
Museum, acting as expert adviser, had objected to
the export of the drawing under the third Waverley
criterion on the grounds that its departure from
the UK would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Romantic
landscape art and Swiss scenery.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that Joseph Anton Koch was one of the
most important Romantic landscape artists and
pioneered the ‘heroic’ landscape style. He spent
the years 1791–94 working in Switzerland, where
he met the English clergyman and literary editor
Dr George Nott (1767–1841), who paid him a
stipend to study in Italy. In Rome in 1795 he also
attracted the patronage of the great collector
Frederick Augustus Hervey, Earl of Bristol and
Bishop of Derry (1730–1803), who pioneered the
rediscovery of 15th-century ‘primitives’. Born in
Austria, Koch became a leading member of the
colony of Northern artists based in Rome, and
considered in 1812 that his popularity with British
patrons would be sufficient for him to set up
practice in England. He spent the years 1812–15
in Vienna before returning to Rome, where he was
an influence on the Nazarenes and may have met
Joseph Mallord William Turner in 1819. At the end
of his life, he also sold drawings to Henry Acland,
a friend of John Ruskin. By defining form with
greater detail and correctness, and rejecting
traditional scenery for mountainous views, Koch
reinvigorated the classical landscape tradition.
The expert adviser stated that the drawing under
consideration was the preparatory study, probably
made in 1793 directly from the motif, for Koch’s
most celebrated composition, The Schmadribach
Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen. Koch’s Schmadribach
Waterfall fundamentally revised the previously
18

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Plate 1a The Schmadribachfall by Joseph Anton Koch
© Bavarian State Painting Collections
Plate 1b and 1c The Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen,
Switzerland by Joseph Anton Koch (in situ at The British Museum
and front view)

accepted norms of landscape. Seemingly inspired
by Albrecht Altdorfer’s Battle of Alexander
(1529, Munich, Alte Pinakothek), he envisaged
a panoramic ‘world landscape’ embodying the
entirety of nature’s system and man’s place within
it. Koch’s interpretation of Alpine scenery was
perhaps more influential on the next generation of
European artists than the formulations of Caspar
David Friedrich or JMW Turner.
The drawing was of national importance as
the preparatory study for the most celebrated
landscape of a leading Romantic painter and as a
representation of Swiss scenery, so highly regarded
by British artists since the 18th century. In his
lifetime, Koch was especially popular with British
collectors, but few of his works remain in the
United Kingdom.
The applicant disagreed that the drawing met the
Waverley criteria. Regarding the first Waverley
criterion, the applicant stated that until its sale
in 2016, the drawing under consideration was
unpublished, and its presence in the United
Kingdom was unknown to specialists and the
broader public. Additionally, Koch was trained
in Germany, lived in Rome, never visited Britain,
had limited ties with British culture, and was never
collected on a significant scale in this country.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion,
the applicant stated that the drawing under
consideration was primarily interesting for the
light it sheds on the artist’s working method. The
scratchy style of the drawing, made in pen over a

sketch in black chalk, differed considerably from
the clarity, regularity and careful execution of the
numerous independent drawings in Koch’s oeuvre.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated that the drawing was especially
relevant as a work clarifying the genesis of the
related watercolour and paintings, none of which
were in a British collection. Koch’s contribution
to landscape painting and drawing was more
clearly demonstrated by the drawings in British
public collections, especially those in Glasgow
and Oxford. Likewise, the prints held at The British
Museum were more illustrative examples of his art.
We heard this case in April 2017 when the
drawing was shown to us. We found that it met
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for
the study of Koch’s art, creative process and in

particular for the development and depiction of the
concept of the sublime. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of three months
to allow an offer to purchase to be made at the fair
matching price of £68,750 (plus VAT of £2,750).
We further recommended that if, by the end of
the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser
had shown a serious intention to raise funds with
a view to making an offer to purchase the drawing,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by The British Museum to
raise funds to purchase the drawing. A decision
on the export licence application was deferred for
a further three months. We were subsequently
informed that the drawing had been purchased by
The British Museum with assistance from Art Fund.
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

19

Case 2 A Roman figurine of a
man wearing a hooded cloak
A figurine of a man wearing a hooded cloak made
of copper alloy, measuring 6.5cm high, 4.8cm
wide and 1.7cm thick, weight 65.8g. Unknown
maker, probably Romano-British; Roman (AD
43–410). Good condition but incomplete (the
lower parts of the legs and arms are missing).
The applicant had applied to export the figurine
to France. The value shown on the export licence
application was £550, which represented an agreed
sale subject to the granting of an export licence.
The Project Curator: Romano-British Collections,
Department of Britain, Europe and Prehistory,
The British Museum, acting as expert adviser, had
objected to the export of the figurine under the
first and third Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was so closely connected

Plate 2a Roman figurine (front view)
20

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

with our history and national life and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of Romano
British costume and the relationship between
textual and archaeological sources.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the copper alloy figure
wore a hooded cloak known as the birrus
Britannicus mentioned as specifically British in
the Edict of Diocletian in AD 301. It was extremely
unusual for portable art of this period to depict a
distinctively British character; figurines were more
usually shown wearing a hooded garment of a style
common to Gaul and the North Western provinces
in general. The province of Britannia was known
as an exporter of woollen garments in the wider
Roman Empire but the archaeological evidence
for this was limited.

As a uniquely detailed three-dimensional
illustration of the birrus Britannicus it was
important for research on Romano-British
costume. Its nearest comparandum was
the (two-dimensional) mosaic depicting a
personification of winter at Chedworth Roman
Villa. It was also extremely significant for our
understanding of the relationship between
textual and archaeological sources.
The applicant did not disagree that the figurine
met the Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in May 2017 when the figurine
was shown to us. We found that it met the
third Waverley criterion on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for
the study of provincial Roman costume in the

province of Britannia. We recommended that the
decision on the export licence application should
be deferred for an initial period of two months to
allow an offer to purchase to be made at the fair
matching price of £550. We further recommended
that if, by the end of the initial deferral period,
a potential purchaser had shown a serious intention
to raise funds with a view to making an offer to
purchase the figurine, the deferral period should be
extended by a further two months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention by Chelmsford Museum to
raise funds to purchase the figurine. A decision
on the export licence application was deferred
for a further two months. We were subsequently
informed that the figurine had been purchased
by Chelmsford Museum with assistance from
a private benefactor.

Plate 2b Roman figurine (rear view)
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

21

Case 3 A portrait bust, Queen Victoria,
by Alfred Gilbert
White marble bust portrait (height 96cm) of
Queen Victoria (1819–1901; r.1837–1901)
executed by Alfred Gilbert (1854–1934) from
1887 to 1889. It is signed on the front of the
veined marble socle: ‘ALFRED GILBERT R.A./FECIT’.
The applicant had applied to export the sculpture
to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £1,200,000, which
represented an agreed private sale price subject to
the granting of an export licence.
The Senior Curator of Sculpture, Victoria and Albert
Museum, acting as expert adviser, had objected to
the export of the sculpture under the first, second
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was so closely connected with our
history and national life, it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of Alfred Gilbert’s oeuvre
and the history of sculpture in Britain.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that this monumental, over life-sized
white marble bust portrait had the appearance of
a highly realistic and closely observed likeness of
the monarch.
Gilbert rarely worked in marble; most of his
sculptures were made of bronze. The present bust
was therefore highly exceptional. Its origins lay
however in a statue of bronze, the Jubilee Memorial
to the Queen made for Winchester. This was a
full-length figure of Queen Victoria, unveiled by
her daughter Princess Louise in August 1887. A
variant of this, also in bronze, was produced for
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and unveiled there in 1903.
The Winchester statue has been likened to some of
the great Roman Baroque figures, such as Bernini’s
tomb of Urban VIII in St Peter’s in Rome, which
Gilbert would have known well. The full-scale
plaster model for the Winchester Queen Victoria
was shown at the Royal Academy in the following
year, 1888, and was received with great acclaim,
Rodin calling it the best monumental figure
produced in England. Gilbert had in fact hoped to
produce the Winchester portrait in marble, but
was unable to do so because the authorities there
wanted to display it outside, and so argued that
bronze would be more suitable.

Plate 3a A portrait bust, Queen Victoria,
by Alfred Gilbert
22

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

The provenance of this marble bust was unbroken.
The Army & Navy Club commissioned it from
the sculptor in 1887, and it had remained in their
possession ever since. Additionally, documents
and correspondence recording the vagaries of the
commission were held at the London Metropolitan
Archives. This great sculpture symbolised the Club’s
prestige, its pride in its own history, as well as its
reverence for the reigning monarch.
The finesse and sensitivity of marble carving
seen in this bust, with its range of textures and
depth, were virtually unparalleled in 19thcentury portrait sculpture. As a likeness of the
ageing Queen Victoria this massy bust, a truly
monumental work, was a remarkable and acute
rendition of her long life as seen in her careworn
yet majestic features. Gilbert executed very few
marble sculptures, and this work must rank as one
of his most significant.
The applicant did not disagree that the sculpture
met the Waverley criteria.

We heard this case in July 2017 when the
sculpture was shown to us. We found that it
met the first, second and third Waverley criteria
on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it
was of outstanding significance for the study of
Alfred Gilbert, the leading British sculptor of his
generation. We recommended that the decision on
the export licence application should be deferred
for an initial period of three months to allow an
offer to purchase to be made at the fair matching
price of £1,200,000 (plus VAT of £240,000).
We further recommended that if, by the end of
the initial deferral period, a potential purchaser
had shown a serious intention to raise funds with
a view to making an offer to purchase the sculpture,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
four months.
During the initial deferral period,
we were informed of a serious
intention by the Fitzwilliam
Museum to raise funds to
purchase the sculpture.
A decision on the export
licence application was
deferred for a further
four months. We were
subsequently informed
that the sculpture had
been purchased by the
Fitzwilliam Museum
with assistance from
the National Heritage
Memorial Fund.

Plate 3b A portrait bust, Queen Victoria,
by Alfred Gilbert (side view)
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

23

Case 4 Workes (1640)
by Benjamin Jonson
This was a second edition printed book of
volume 1 of Ben Jonson, The Workes of Benjamin
Jonson (first published c.1620; this edition 1640,
published in London by Richard Bishop to be sold
by Andrew Crooke) with manuscript annotations.
It had been rebound in plain sprinkled calf,
probably around 1900. It measures around
30cm by 19cm by 6cm.
The applicant had applied to export the book
to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £48,000, which
represented the price at which the owners
had agreed to sell subject to the granting
of an export licence.
The Head of Western Heritage, British Library,
assisted by Lead Curator, post-1858 India Office
Records, British Library, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the book under the
third Waverley criterion on the grounds that its
departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for the
study of Benjamin Jonson’s plays in performance.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the significance of the
item lay in the extensive near-contemporary
manuscript annotations to the play Epicoene or The
Silent Woman. These annotations included stage
directions, details of props and textual corrections.
Ben Jonson (1572–1637) was arguably the most
important writer of the English Renaissance
after Shakespeare. Epicoene was one of Jonson’s
17 plays; it was written and first performed in
1609–10. Innovative for being a comedy which
did not end in a marriage, it was not at first well
received but it later achieved great prestige. It was
apparently the first play performed after Charles
II re-opened the theatres in 1660. Following the
Restoration, printed playbooks published before
the Commonwealth were mined as a source of
theatrical material. Manuscript annotations in the
books could shed light on the way that these texts
were repurposed for a different age. Only nine
copies of pre-Restoration plays were known
to preserve theatrical annotations.
The annotated volume was of outstanding
significance for the study of English theatre in
the 17th century and, in particular, for the study

Plate 4a Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson
(spine and inner page spread)
24

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

of Ben Jonson’s plays in performance. Previously,
there had been no evidence of the preparation
of any Jonson play, masque or entertainment
for performance. Indeed, material which told us
about the performance of any pre-Restoration
play was extremely scarce. This volume occupied
a unique place among surviving materials because
of the nature and range of its annotations, which
collectively fell into no category yet known to
scholars of 17th-century theatre. A product of a
period when plays were seen, not as finished pieces,
but as perpetual works in progress, this volume had
the potential to change scholars’ understanding of
how plays were transmitted from the stage to the
page, and from the page back again to the stage.
The applicant disagreed that the book met the
Waverley criteria. Regarding the first Waverley
criterion, the applicant stated that while Benjamin
Jonson as a playwright was undoubtedly of
national importance, this material, although
interesting, related to his posthumous
reception. Regarding the second Waverley
criterion, the applicant stated that they did
not consider the book to be of outstanding
aesthetic importance. Regarding the third
Waverley criterion, the applicant stated
that while it was of certain significance
to the study of English theatrical history,
the copy was a secondary rather than
primary source and consequently not of
outstanding significance. Furthermore, it
was not a prompt copy and the performance
it was intended for was not identifiable.
There were numerous other annotated
prompt or ‘theatrical’ copies of postRestoration printed plays by other authors,
including Shakespeare.
We heard this case in September 2017 when
the book was shown to us. We found that
it met the third Waverley criterion on the
grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding significance for the study of
English theatre in the 17th century and, in
particular, for the study of Benjamin Jonson
plays in performance. We recommended
that the decision on the export licence
application should be deferred for an initial
period of three months to allow an offer

to purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £48,000. We further recommended that if, by
the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the book, the deferral period should be extended
by a further three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were
informed of a serious intention to raise funds
to purchase the book. We were subsequently
informed that the book had been purchased by
The University of Edinburgh with assistance from
the Friends of the National Libraries, the Friends
of Edinburgh University Library and the John R
Murray Charitable Trust.

Plate 4b Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson (detail)

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

25

Case 5 Mae West Lips Sofa,
Salvador Dalí and Edward James
An upholstered sofa (one of a pair) designed
by Salvador Dalí (1904–89) and Edward James
(1907–84) in 1938 for Monkton House, West
Dean, Sussex, James’s country house. Probably
made by Green & Abbott, London. Felted wool
upholstery with decorative appliqués and wool
fringing over a wooden carcass, measuring 79cm
high by 202cm wide by 92cm deep.
The applicant had applied to export the sofa to
the United States. The value shown on the export
licence application was £480,281.56, which
represented the hammer price paid by the owner
at auction plus the buyer’s premium plus artist
resale rights.
The Keeper of Furniture, Textiles and Fashion,
Victoria and Albert Museum, acting as expert
adviser, had objected to the export of the sofa
under the first, second and third Waverley criteria
on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it
was of outstanding significance for for the study
of furniture history as well as the history of design
and Surrealist art.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the sofa was the single
most important example of Surrealist furniture
ever made in Britain. Its provenance and the
circumstances of its creation are exceptional in
the annals of modern art and design in Britain. The
sofa was not merely a commission, but a genuine
collaboration between one of the most important
and influential artists of the 20th century and his
most significant British patron. The impetus for its
creation came from James rather than Dalí and the
decorative elements on the sofa related directly to
the decoration of the interior of Monkton House.
The house, originally designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens
in 1902 for James’s parents, was renovated by
James in the mid-1930s. Assisted by architect
Christopher ‘Kit’ Nicholson (and Hugh Casson)
and decorator Norris Wakefield, he created an
astounding mélange of Victorian, Regency and
Surrealist design. Intentionally shocking Surrealist
objects and surface treatments filled the spaces
and surfaces of the house.
The initial concept of a Mae West Lips Sofa may
have arisen in 1936 after the completion of Dalí’s
gouache Mae West’s Face which May Be Used as a
Surrealist Apartment in 1934–35. Five sofas in total
were made, all in 1938: a single sofa in pink satin
(Edward James Foundation); a pair in contrasting
26

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Plate 5a Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí
and Edward James (side view)
Plate 5b Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí
and Edward James (in situ). Elizabeth Whiting
& Associates / Alamy Stock Photo		

red (seat) and pink (base) felted wool (Brighton
Museum and Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen,
Rotterdam), and the present black-fringed example
and its pair, both made expressly for Monkton
(both sold at auction within the last year). This
pair was very consciously altered by James from
the other versions to make it an integral part of
the decoration of his grand project for a Surrealist
interior. It was also elongated to give the lips a
different appearance. The pair was positioned in
the dining room – designed to fit in with black,
crocheted pelmets (‘like an old Spanish sacristy’)
and other black-fringed elements, while the red
colour was reflected in the (striped) curtains.
The fringing was, in James’s words, intended ‘to
look like the embroidery upon the epaulettes of a
picador or the breeches and hat of a toreador’.
James’s vision of his Surrealist interior remained
intact even after his death until when, despite the
objections of English Heritage, the 20th Century
Society, SAVE Britain and leading architectural
critics, the Edward James Foundation sold Monkton
and numerous contents rather than attempt to
preserve it. The fact that Monkton was now in
private ownership may not rule out that this hugely
important house could – eventually – be restored
and opened to the public, much in the way that,
say, Spencer House or Croome Court had once
again become accessible to the public after long
periods of private ownership and an even more
extreme dispersal of their original contents and
interior decoration.
The applicant disagreed that the sofa met the
Waverley criteria.

With regard to the first Waverley criterion, this
work was one of five that were made for James
by two different manufacturers in 1938. In their
opinion, the sofa was not unique and there were
similar and better examples in England.
With regard to the second Waverley criterion,
the aesthetic taste manifested by this sofa could
be appreciated in the UK through other examples
in public ownership. This sofa was one of a pair
conceived by Salvador Dalí and Edward James in
1936, and executed by Green & Abbott in 1938,
to decorate the dining room at Monkton House.
Dalí and James collaborated on the essential
design of the Mae West Lips Sofa, however it was

James who decided upon the final shapes, and the
upholstery treatment of the five examples that
he commissioned for his own use. James designed
three different interpretations of the sofa, which
were produced as two pairs in wool and a single
example finished in satin. The condition of the sofa
was good for its age but of the three felt appliqué
shapes, suggestive of caterpillar larvae, to the seat
and backs of both examples, one had been replaced.
With regard to the third Waverley criterion,
the sofa was one of five that were made for
James by two different manufacturers in 1938.
This was an interesting sofa but it was not, in itself,
an outstanding object for the study of a particular

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

27

branch of art, learning or history. Other examples
of the design concept remained in the UK and on
public view. While the concept of the Mae West Lips
Sofa was a good example of Dalí’s collaboration
with James for British Surrealist interior
decoration, it was realised and best demonstrated
by the pink satin sofa retained by the Edward James
Foundation and the red and pink wool example
on display in Brighton. Public access to view a
Mae West Lips Sofa was, therefore, well served
by these examples.
We heard this case in October 2017 when the
sofa was shown to us. We found that it met the
first, second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected
with our history and national life, it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for the study of furniture
history as well as the history of design and
Surrealist art. We recommended that the decision
on the export licence application should be
deferred for an initial period of three months
to allow an offer to purchase to be made

28

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

at the fair matching price £480,281.56 (plus VAT
of £16,600).We further recommended that if, by
the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the sofa, the deferral period should be extended
by a further three months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, we were
informed of a serious intention by the Victoria and
Albert Museum to raise funds to purchase the sofa.
Although the expression of interest came from the
Secretary of State’s expert adviser, confirmation
was obtained at the time of the objection and
at the meeting that the institution with which
they were connected was not making enquiries
with a view to purchasing or in the process of
purchasing the item. A decision on the export
licence application was deferred for a further three
months. We were subsequently informed that
the sofa had been purchased by the Victoria and
Albert Museum with assistance from V&A
Members, Art Fund and a bequest from
Derek Woodman.

Plate 5c Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí
and Edward James (front view)
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

29

Plate 6 The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo
dei Camerlenghi by Francesco Guardi
30

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Case 6 The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo
dei Camerlenghi by Francesco Guardi
Francesco Guardi (1712–93), The
Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei
Camerlenghi, mid- to late-1760s.
Oil on canvas, measuring 119.7cm by
204.3cm. Signed ‘GUARDI’ (lower left).
The applicant had applied to
export the painting to Ireland.
The value shown on the export
licence application was £26,205,000,
which represented the sale price at
auction, comprising the hammer
price of £23,250,000 plus buyer’s
premium of £2,955,000, plus VAT
of £591,000.
The Director of The National Gallery,
assisted by the Associate Curator of
Paintings 1600–1800, The National
Gallery, acting as expert adviser,
had objected to the export of the
painting under the second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds
that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance
and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of Guardi’s work,
Venetian view painting and the study
of Grand Tour patronage and taste.
The expert adviser had provided
a written submission stating that
alongside Canaletto and his nephew
Bellotto, Guardi formed part of
the triumvirate of great Venetian
view painters of the 18th century.
He took particular pleasure in
rendering the vibrant atmosphere of
Venetian light and its dazzling effect
on water. With its gentle fall of afternoon light,
masterful colouring and dynamic composition in
which a series of gondolas bisect the canal, The
Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi
epitomised Guardi’s preference for atmosphere
before topographical accuracy. Guardi was much
admired in the 19th century for his impressionistic
depictions of Venice and the Lagoon, which
inspired many generations of artists visiting
the city, most especially JMW Turner.
Although there were significant paintings by Guardi
in British public and private collections, the ambition,
grandeur and magnificence of this rendering of
Venice were unsurpassed. This was most especially
true following the export of the picture’s pendant,

A View of the Rialto Bridge, Looking North, from the
Fondamenta del Carbon, in 2011.
The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi
was one of only six large-scale canvases ever
painted by Guardi: all six were conceived as pairs.
The only pair of these large-scale canvases that
remained together was at Waddesdon Manor, but
the enormous Waddesdon canvases are earlier
works, darker in tone, and lacking the soaring
elegance of the present picture.
The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi
was probably acquired in Venice in 1768 by
Chaloner Arcedeckne, in whose family it remained
for the next 123 years, when it was acquired
by Sir Edward Cecil Guinness, later 1st Earl of
Iveagh. The picture had an unbroken British
provenance stretching back almost 250 years.
It was not only its remarkable composition that
held value for students and scholars, but also this
early provenance, which provided key insights
into British collecting practices and Grand Tour
taste during the 18th century. Quite simply, no
other painting in a UK collection – either public or
private – encapsulated Guardi’s contribution to the
tradition of view painting in the same way as the
present picture.
The applicant did not disagree that the painting
met the Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in November 2017 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the development of
Guardi, Venetian view painting and the study of
Grand Tour patronage and taste. We recommended
that the decision on the export licence application
should be deferred for an initial period of six
months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £26,796,000. We
further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the painting, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the painting had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

31

Case 7 Ehrenbreitstein by Joseph Mallord
William Turner
Joseph Mallord William Turner (1775–1851):
Ehrenbreitstein, or the Bright Stone of Honour and
the Tomb of Marceau, from Byron’s Childe Harold,
1835. Oil on canvas, measuring 93cm by 48.5cm.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £19,283,750 which
represented the price at auction (£17 million) plus
the buyer’s premium (£1,533,750), and a fee of
£750,000 which the auction house had agreed
to pay to the irrevocable bidder.
The Manton Curator of British Art, Tate Britain,
acting as expert adviser, had objected to the export
of the painting under the first and third Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life and
it was of outstanding significance for the study of
its status as a literary landscape, and as a painting
made primarily for engraving.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that while the subject of this
painting was European, it linked to our history
and national life through the close interest felt by
the artist and his circle; the artist’s repeat visits
to the place depicted; the impact of Byron on its
conception and themes; and the network of friends,
colleagues, patrons and collectors who had shaped
its history and interpretation. The commission
from the engraver John Pye, and past ownership
by Elhanan Bicknell who intended to leave his
collection to the nation, were also significant.
The national importance of this profoundly
European subject was in the special meaning it
had for Turner and within his circle and for Turner’s
self-identification in later life as a European as well
as a British artist. The present picture is his only
painting of Ehrenbreitstein in oil and one of the
group of pictures of German subjects dating from
the second half of his career.

Plate 7 Ehrenbreitstein by Joseph Mallord William Turner
32

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

The applicant did not disagree that the painting
met the Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in November 2017 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of its status as a literary landscape,
affirming the Romantic association of painting and
poetry and in particular the creative relationship
between Turner and Byron; and secondly as a
painting made primarily for engraving, reflecting
on process and reception.
We were not satisfied that the fee of £750,000,
payable by the auction house to the irrevocable
bidder, was a relevant component that should be
taken into account when setting the fair matching
price. This was a business decision taken by the
auction house and a financial arrangement entered
into freely by both parties which mitigated the risk
of the painting not selling at auction.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of four months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price of
£18,533,750 (plus VAT of £306,750). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the painting, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the painting had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

33

Case 8 La Leçon de Piano
by Henri Matisse
This painting by Henri Matisse (1869–1954) is oil
on canvas, dates from 1923 and measures 65cm
by 81cm.
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to Switzerland. The value shown on the export
licence application was £10,798,416.25, which
represented the hammer price paid by the owner
at auction, plus the buyer’s premium, plus artist’s
resale royalty.
The Curator, International Art, Tate Modern, acting
as expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
painting under the first, second and third Waverley
criteria on the grounds that its departure from the
UK would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it was
of outstanding aesthetic importance and it was of
outstanding significance for study.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that there was a rich history
of British engagement with Henri Matisse’s art. La
Leçon de Piano was acquired by Royan Middleton in
1927, through the recently formed Reid & Lefevre
Gallery, on the occasion of the first large-scale
exhibition of Matisse’s work in Britain. With Mrs
R A Workman, Sir William Burrell and Alexander
Maitland, Middleton was one of a small but
dedicated group of Scottish collectors of avantgarde French and British art that emerged in the
early decades of the 20th century.
While Middleton continued to add to his impressive
collection, including works by Paul Cézanne,
Édouard Vuillard and Amedeo Modigliani, among
others, he was also instrumental in bringing French
Impressionist and post-Impressionist artists to the
attention of the public. He lent works (including La
Leçon de Piano) to several shows organised by Reid
& Lefevre, and it had been frequently exhibited in
Britain since 1927. Most recently the painting
was on public display at the Aberdeen Art Gallery
from 2011–15. The expert adviser stated that it
was the best-known painting by Matisse from a
UK private collection.
This work belonged to a small group of paintings
of the same subject by Matisse, which were
painted when the artist had relocated to Nice in
the 1920s. La Leçon de Piano stood out as the most
sophisticated of their number and featured the
vibrantly coloured, highly patterned fabrics that
were synonymous with Matisse’s interior scenes
from the period. The shift of focus away from the
human figure, onto the architecture of the painting
itself, was also a key theme of the Nice paintings.
34

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Works from this decade captured, with remarkable
clarity, the painter’s creative struggle, illustrating
vital connections between the successive stages of
the artist’s career.
The applicant disagreed that the painting met the
Waverley criteria. Regarding the first Waverley
criterion, the applicant stated that the work was
not closely connected with our history and national
life. Painted in France in the late-1920s by a French
artist, La Leçon de Piano had only ever been in a
private collection in the UK. The original owner,
Royan Middleton of Aberdeen, was one of the least
known British collectors of Impressionist and postImpressionist art. It was only on loan to Aberdeen
Art Gallery for a few years in the early-2010s and
had little or no effect on art or culture in the UK.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated that, painted in 1923, La Leçon
de Piano dated from Matisse’s early Nice period
in which he developed a highly decorative style
using his immediate surroundings as the setting for
interior and exterior scenes. In some of these works
the artist used his most important compositional
devices from this period, linking interior and
exterior via a view of the sea, giving his interiors
an uplifting sense of space and atmosphere. The
closed, frieze-like composition of La Leçon de Piano
emphasises the decorative patterns incorporated
into the overall design, without the subtle relief
granted by an indication of an exterior space.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, the
applicant stated there were currently 21 paintings
by Henri Matisse in public institutions in the
UK, the majority of which were from the artist’s
Nice period. The relative obscurity of La Leçon de
Piano in the artist’s oeuvre, and the availability of
several other highly important paintings in public
collections throughout the UK, led the applicant
to believe that this work was not of outstanding
significance for study of a particular branch of art,
learning or history.
We heard this case in December 2017 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that the
painting did not meet any of the Waverley criteria
and recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was issued.

Case 9
George I Palladian baby house
This doll’s house, or baby house, is a rare and
magnificent example from the early-18th
century, probably made between 1720 and 1740.
It is largely made of mahogany, oak and softwood,
with glazed windows, measuring 204cm high by
135cm wide by 67cm deep.
The applicant had applied to export the baby
house to the United States. The value shown
on the export licence application was £65,000,
which represented the price at which the owner
had agreed to sell subject to the granting of an
export licence.

The 17th- and 18th- century baby house was a
distinctly different artefact from the 19th- and
20th-century child’s doll’s house. The concept
of the miniature house came to England from
the Netherlands and Germany in the early18th century. Its purpose was to train wealthy
teenage girls in household management, although
the functional relationship between mothers,
daughters and baby houses in England in the
18th century was a complex and evolving one.
The applicant did not comment on whether
the baby house met the Waverley criteria.

The Senior Curator, Furniture and Woodwork,
National Museums Scotland, acting as expert
adviser, had objected to the export of the baby
house under the third Waverley criterion on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the history and
material culture of childhood.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the item was one of the
largest such houses and of real aesthetic merit.
The absence of any contents focused attention on
its original condition and function. Although the
provenance was uncertain, enough was known to
place the house within its original social context.
It was earlier in date than any baby house in a UK
public collection and earlier than most of those
known to be in private collections.
The house took the form of a three-storey,
five-bay structure with quoins and string courses,
on a rusticated basement, with a flat roof, dentilled
cornice and balustrade, and with the three central
projecting bays supporting a pediment. The
small supporting stand was a later addition. The
central and side bays were hinged to open as three
doors, the central one bearing a lock. The interior
contains nine rooms, each with a fireplace. The
fireplaces varied to reflect the status and function
of each room. The four-pane windows may have
been replacements or might have represented
casements. There was no record of the furniture
and contents of the house, which appeared to
have been removed before 1980.

Plate 8a George I Palladian baby house (front view)

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

35

We heard this case in December 2017 when the
baby house was shown to us. We found that it met
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for the
study of the history of childhood and its potential
for the reappraisal of 18th-century baby houses.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £65,000 (plus VAT of £13,000). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial

Plate 8b George I Palladian baby house (front view with
doors open)
36

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the baby house, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were
informed of a serious intention to raise funds to
purchase the baby house by the V&A Museum of
Childhood. We were subsequently informed that
the baby house had been purchased by the V&A
Museum of Childhood.

Case 10 Images from the Life (The Norman
Album) by Julia Margaret Cameron
An album containing 75 photographs by Julia
Margaret Cameron (1815–79), taken between
1864 and 1869, selected by the photographer
and presented by her to her daughter, Julia, and
son-in-law, Charles Norman, in September 1869.
The album measured 45.9cm by 31.4cm. It was
bound in red Morocco and was embossed on the
cover with the title ‘Mrs Cameron’s Photographs
from the Life’. Given to Julia Norman (Cameron’s
daughter) in 1869, it had remained in the
possession of the Norman family since that time.
The applicant had applied to export the album
to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £4,098,361,
which represented an estimate.
The Senior Curator, Photographs, Victoria and
Albert Museum, acting as expert adviser, had
objected to the export of the album under the
first, second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be
a misfortune because it was so closely connected
with our history and national life, it was of
outstanding aesthetic importance and it was
of outstanding significance for the study of the
history of photography and, through her selection
of subjects, the broader history of 19th-century
art and literature.

However, the significance of this album lied not
only in its individual photographs but in the album
as a whole, representing, as it did, a very personal
selection of work chosen and sequenced by the
artist herself and intended as a gift for her beloved
daughter. Of all the albums compiled by Cameron
which were known, this album was arguably
the most personal and most important and the
individual prints were particularly fine examples.
Of all 19th-century photographers, Julia
Margaret Cameron was probably the most widely
represented in public and private collections
throughout the world.
It was noted that 12 prints in the album were not
replicated in UK public collections. The subjects
appeared to be predominately family members.
The expert adviser was asked how significant it
was that these individuals were not prominent
19th-century figures. The expert adviser indicated
that Julia Margaret Cameron was unconcerned
with portraying social standing in the context of
her art and was even-handed in the treatment of
her subjects.
Plate 9a Images from the Life (The Norman Album)
by Julia Margaret Cameron (cover view)

The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the album was particularly
significant since it was made as a gift for Julia,
Cameron’s daughter, whose gift of a camera
introduced Cameron to photography. Arranged
in a single sequence from front to back it includes
some of her finest and best-known portraits,
including Julia Jackson, John Herschel, Alfred
Tennyson and Charles Darwin.
Between 1864 and 1869 Cameron assembled a
number of albums for her family, friends and close
acquaintances. Cameron embraced the album
format, seeing it as an expressive medium which
allowed her to present herself and her work as
artistic. Each album represented hundreds of
hours of work and were assembled with enormous
care and considerable thought as to how the
images were to be viewed. It was impossible to
ascertain exactly how many albums she made
but 10 were known to have survived and each was
different and designed to be meaningful to the
individual recipient.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

37

The applicant did not disagree that the album met
the Waverley criteria. They stated in a written
submission that there was no doubt that the
Norman Album was an item of significance
in Julia Margaret Cameron’s body of work.
The applicant noted that most of the images and
all of the major images in the album were already
represented in UK public collections. Furthermore,
in addition to the Norman Album, there was
another major Cameron presentation album in
a private UK collection (the Lindsay Album), so
the UK was well supplied with her work in both
individual plates and albums.
We heard this case in July 2017 when the album
was shown to us. We found that it met the second
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of the history of photography and,
in particular, the work of Julia Margaret Cameron,
one of the most significant photographers of the
19th century.
We were, however, unable to recommend a
fair matching price and recommended that the
Secretary of State should obtain an independent
valuation of the album.
The applicant was given the option to agree to be
bound by the valuer appointed by the Secretary
of State once their identity was known or to
appoint their own independent valuer with a
view to the two independent valuers agreeing a
valuation. In the event that they were unable to
agree, the Secretary of State would appoint a third
person to act as an arbitrator (not as an expert)
by whose decision the parties would be bound.
The applicant agreed to this procedure.

Plates 9b-j Images from the Life (The Norman Album)
by Julia Margaret Cameron (inner page details)
Subjects: b) Darwin, c) Browning, d) Tennyson,
e) subject unknown, f) Julia Jackson, g) subjects
unknown, h) subjects unknown, i) Herschel,
j) subjects unknown
38

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

The Secretary of State agreed the Committee’s
recommendation and having been given the
identity of the valuer appointed by the Secretary
of State the applicant agreed to be bound by their
valuation which was £3.7 million and the Secretary
of State recommended that as the fair matching
price. Having regard to the fair matching price the
Committee agreed to recommend to the Secretary
of State that the decision on the export licence
should be deferred for an initial period of three
months to allow an offer to purchase to be made at
the fair matching price of £3.7 million. We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the album, the deferral
should be extended by a further four months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the album had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 9b

Plate 9c

Plate 9d

Plate 9e

Plate 9f

Plate 9g

Plate 9h

Plate 9i

Plate 9j
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

39

Case 11 The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host
by John Martin
Watercolour by John Martin (1789–1854),
The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host, signed and
dated: ‘J. Martin/1836’ (lower right). Pencil and
watercolour with gum arabic heightened with
bodycolour and with scratching out; 58.4cm
by 85.7cm.
The applicant had applied to export the
watercolour to the United States. The value shown
on the export licence application was £1,475,000,
which represented the sterling equivalent of
the agreed sale price ($2 million), subject to the
granting of an export licence, calculated at the
HM Customs USD/GBP FX rate for the month of
October 2017 of 1.3564.
The Keeper, Department of Prints and Drawings,
The British Museum, assisted by the Curator of
British Drawings and Watercolours, The British
Museum, acting as expert adviser, had objected to
the export of the watercolour under the second
and third Waverley criteria on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of the history of British art as a pivotal
work in the oeuvre of John Martin.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that, although best known
for his spectacular oil paintings and the series of
mezzotints illustrating Paradise Lost and the Bible,
with this picture John Martin created the epitome
of an ‘exhibition watercolour’ in the sublime style,
intended to stand its own ground in competition
with oils on the walls of exhibitions. His work
was seen by thousands around the country in his
own lifetime and by many more around the world
through his prints.
The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host was the most
spectacular of Martin’s works of this type and was
an entirely different type of work compared to
Turner’s more sublime watercolours like Travellers
Caught in a Snowstorm (The British Museum) or
his watercolours of shipwrecks. Turner’s were
anchored in nature whereas Martin’s came entirely

40

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

from his imagination and from the style and motifs
he had developed in the 1820s in his oils and in the
early-1830s in his mezzotints. Here he successfully
captured them in watercolour, in an example
that had no match in his own work or that of his
contemporaries. This was acknowledged by its
inclusion in The Great Age of British Watercolours,
the definitive watercolour exhibition of our age
at the Royal Academy in 1993, where it stood
out memorably from the rest of the works as
an example that was unique in vision and in the
medium and style used to achieve it.
This watercolour was developed from one of the
key compositions from the artist’s mezzotint
series, a composition that was described by the
Library of Fine Arts (January 1834) as ‘the finest
of the series, the grandest and richest of all’. The
mezzotint of The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host was
hugely well known, admired and influential in its
print form. It was the only time he was to develop a
mezzotint composition in this way in watercolour,
and was thus a pivotal work in his oeuvre and of
critical importance in the development of his art.
The applicant disagreed that the watercolour
met the Waverley criteria. Regarding the first
Waverley criterion, the applicant stated that,
like the majority of British watercolours, this John
Martin had remained in England since its creation.
It had been in a private collection and generally
unavailable to the public. It would not be missed,
and given the large number of ready substitutes
in British collections (see below), its departure
could not reasonably be considered a
national misfortune.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion,
the applicant stated that while the picture
was a work of beauty and power it was not of
outstanding aesthetic importance. John Martin’s
work was extraordinarily well represented in
British collections, with the best examples of his
apocalyptic scenes for which he was famous in
Tate Britain, the Laing Art Gallery, the Walker Art
Gallery and Southampton City Art Gallery. The
applicant suggested that if one were to put this

watercolour in a room of Martin’s best works from
British collections, it would not stand out.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, if one was
studying any facet of the work of John Martin or
his contemporaries, Britain was the place to do it
and the departure of this watercolour would not
change that. As noted above, the best examples of
his work in every genre, format and medium are
housed in British public and private collections. This
watercolour was an excellent example of Martin’s
work, but cannot reasonably be considered as of
‘outstanding significance’ in the field.
We heard this case in January 2018 when the
watercolour was shown to us. We found that it
met the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of, and reassessment of, John Martin,
the most popular artist of his day, dismissed by the

art establishment and ignored for almost a century,
whose influence on the development of epic,
visionary landscape painting, both in Britain and in
America, was now widely acknowledged.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price of
£1,509,102. This represented the agreed sale price
converted to Pounds Sterling at USD/GBP FX rate
(xe.com) on the date of the meeting of 1.3252911.
We further recommended that if, by the end of the
initial deferral period, a potential purchaser had
shown a serious intention to raise funds with a view
to making an offer to purchase the watercolour,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
four months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the watercolour had been made and we
were not aware of any serious intention to raise
funds. An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 10 The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host by John
Martin. Digital image courtesy of the Getty’s Open
Content Program.
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

41

Case 12
Man’s silk/wool doublet
A man’s silk/wool doublet, c.1660–65, by an
unknown English tailor, measured 95cm across
the chest and 45cm in length overall. Made of a
textile consisting of watered silk and wool, it is
structurally sound and unmarked; however, the
silk lining is fragile.
The applicant had applied to export the doublet
to Chile. The value shown on the export licence
application was £25,000, which represented an
estimated value.
The Acting Keeper, Furniture, Textiles and
Fashion, Victoria and Albert Museum, acting as
expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
doublet under the third Waverley criterion on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
significance for the study of the history of men’s
dress and of tailoring in England.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that it was a finely tailored
garment with paned sleeves, and that it was rare,
unique and essential to the history of English
dress and the scholarship of English tailoring. Until
the 1670s, every man in England would have had
at least one doublet and anyone above the rank
of gentleman owned many such items. Probate
inventories from this period demonstrated that
even a poor labourer had two ‘dublettes’ in his
wardrobe and the diary of Samuel Pepys recorded
the acquisition of new ones in the latest style
and most fashionable textiles. The study of dress
history attempts to communicate the richness
and variety of both ‘ordinary clothing’ as well as
the fashions of the elite. Only six doublets have
survived in Britain to represent a whole decade
of men’s dress. The 1660s, like the decades of the
1640s and 1650s, were poorly represented in terms
of men’s clothing.
The ‘Mansel-Pleydell doublet’ represented the
final stylistic form of a garment that had a long
history in the male wardrobe. Evolving from a
plain, protective arming garment to fashionable
dress made of luxurious and lavishly embellished
fabrics, the doublet was part of every Englishman’s
dress from the late-15th century to the late-17th
century. A doublet, cloak and breeches formed the

42

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

‘three-piece suit’ of this era. By 1670, the doublet
had vanished from the fashionable wardrobe in
England and this example was a rare representation
of the last version of this type of garment.
The expert adviser explained that it was impossible
to study the history of 17th-century tailoring
without the original clothing. Like other trades,
tailoring was learned by apprenticeship and then
guild membership. Furthermore, there was very
little literature on tailoring until the end of the
18th century. Limited literacy among tailors and,
more importantly, the necessity of preserving
trade secrets, meant that few tailors published
details of how clothes were made. Furthermore,
because all garments were bespoke and handsewn, no two were ever the same, unlike modern
ready-made clothes.
The applicant disagreed that the doublet met the
Waverley criteria. Regarding the first Waverley
criterion, the applicant argued that the doublet
was not a part of a collection of great historic
significance and that the English provenance was
not certain. It was not definitively known when
the doublet entered into the Mansel-Pleydell
family’s collection.
Regarding the second Waverley criterion, the
doublet was a fine and attractive garment but the
applicant did not believe it could be argued that
it was of outstanding aesthetic importance and
lacked any special or sophisticated workmanship.
There were many other 17th-century textiles in
public collections in the United Kingdom which
were of finer workmanship and which could be
better described as aesthetically outstanding.
Regarding the third Waverley criterion, the
applicant accepted that the doublet was a rare
survival from the mid-17th century, but did not
believe it was outstandingly important as an object
of study in the United Kingdom as it would not add
considerably to the resources already available.
We heard this case in September 2017 when
the doublet was shown to us. We found that the
doublet did not meet any of the Waverley criteria
and recommended that an export licence be issued.
An export licence was issued.

Case 13 Lobster Telephone
(White Aphrodisiac),
Salvador Dalí and Edward James
Salvador Dalí (1904–89) and Edward James
(1907–84), 1938. Painted plaster, metal and
Bakelite found object (telephone), measuring
19cm by 31.7cm by 16cm.
The applicant had applied to export the telephone
to Hong Kong. The value shown on the export
licence application was £853,047.23, which
represented the hammer price at auction plus
the buyer’s premium and artist resale royalty.
The Head of Displays, Tate Modern, acting as
expert adviser, had objected to the export of
the telephone under the first, second and third
Waverley criteria on the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was
so closely connected with our history and national
life, it was of outstanding aesthetic importance and
it was of outstanding significance for the study of
the history of Surrealism in Britain.
The expert adviser provided a written submission
stating that Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac)
was arguably the most successful of the Surrealist
objects ever produced. The Surrealists wanted to
generate astonishing new realities by juxtaposing
unrelated objects, and the formal similarity of
this pairing pointed to their functional divergence.
It was conceived by Salvador Dalí and his British
patron Edward James. Dalí was reported to have
made a version as early as 1935, but the work
under consideration resulted directly from James’s
documented purchase of plaster lobsters in
July 1938.
Alongside the formation of his art collection,
James’s conception of the domestic environments
in his residences at Wimpole Street, London, and
West Dean, Sussex, exemplified his response to
Surrealism, and Lobster Telephone represented
the quintessential surrealisation of an everyday
object in this context. The 11 plaster lobsters that
he commissioned were either painted red or, as in
the Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac) under
consideration, remained white and were varnished.
The red versions were subsequently mounted on
black telephones and white versions on white
telephones. The resulting assemblages have
been widely discussed and exhibited.

This was an object that is highly significant to the
history of taste in Britain. Surrealist influence
was felt most emphatically at the moment of the
International Exhibition of Surrealism in London
in 1936. James, who had become close friends
with Dalí in 1934, was – with Roland Penrose and
Herbert Read – among the British intellectuals
most engaged with its ideas. The Lobster Telephone
series is emblematic of the collaboration of Dalí
and James, which was at its height in 1936–39.
Surrealism was one of the most influential currents
in 20th-century culture, creating iconic work of
very significant aesthetic value. The impetus for
Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac) provided
by Dalí reinforced this assessment, as it embodied
the flair that marked him out as one of the most
inventive artists of the century. His ability to
conjure astonishment from ordinary situations
came to maturity during the period when Lobster
Telephone was conceived so that, with the closely
associated Mae West Lips Sofa (also made with
James), it came to stand for Surrealism.
Lobster Telephone was of significant scholarly
interest to the history of Surrealism in Britain.
Much still needed to be uncovered about both
Dalí and James, and their collaborations, as well
as the production of this particular work. That this
was rooted in Britain had the potential to cast a
sharper light on a crucial period locally, nationally
and internationally.
The applicant did not disagree that the telephone
met the Waverley criteria.

Plate 11a Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac),
Salvador Dalí and Edward James
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

43

We heard this case in February 2018 when the
telephone was shown to us. We found that it
met the first, second and third Waverley criteria
on the grounds that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune because it was so closely
connected with our history and national life, it
was of outstanding aesthetic importance and it
was of outstanding significance for the study of
the history of Surrealism, taste and design in the
UK. We recommended that the decision on the
export licence application should be deferred for
an initial period of three months to allow an offer
to purchase to be made at the fair matching price
of £853,047.23 (plus VAT of £29,000). We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the telephone, the
deferral period should be extended by a further
three months.
During the initial deferral period, we were informed
of a serious intention to raise funds to purchase
the telephone by a UK institution. A decision on
the export licence application was deferred for a
further three months. The original UK institution
was unable to proceed with the acquisition;
however, we were subsequently informed that
the telephone had been purchased by National
Galleries of Scotland with assistance from
Art Fund and the Henry and Sula Walton Fund.

Plate 11b Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac),
Salvador Dalí and Edward James (detail)
44

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

45

Case 14 The Head of an African Man
Wearing a Turban by Sir Peter Paul Rubens
Peter Paul Rubens (1577–1640), The Head
of an African Man Wearing a Turban. Oil on
paper, laid down on panel, measuring 54cm
by 39cm (excluding a modern strip of paint
of approximately 8cm in width that has been
added at left).
The applicant had applied to export the painting
to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £7,722,604, which
represented the Pounds Sterling equivalent of the
agreed sale price ($10,000,000) subject to the
granting of an export licence for permanent export.
The Director of The National Gallery, assisted
by the Curator of Dutch and Flemish Paintings
1600-1800, The National Gallery, acting as expert
adviser, had objected to the export of the painting
under the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would be a
misfortune because it was of outstanding aesthetic
importance and it was of outstanding significance
for the study of Rubens’ artistic practice.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the oil sketch depicted the
head of an African man wearing a turban. It was
almost entirely painted in shades of brown set off
by striking accents and highlights in white denoting
the turban and some of the facial features, while
there were some small but judiciously placed
accents in bright red. The work was painted on a
paper support which was previously used for a list
of accounts, written in Italian. The artist turned
the paper 90 degrees and prepared it with a light
pink-brown ground before painting his sketch.
The sketch served as preparatory to the head and
turban of the African Magus in Rubens’ Adoration
of the Magi in the Museo Nacional del Prado in
Madrid, originally painted in 1609 and reworked
by the artist 20 years later. It was an example of
Rubens’ practice of preparing his works with the
help of sketches, often carried out in oil on panel.
Unusually, the work under consideration was in the
technique of oil on paper.
The sketch was likely to have been painted after
a live model, which made it among the relatively
rare 17th-century examples of a work recording the
features of an African man in Europe, even if we did
not know his identity. The subject matter was also
significant in the sense that the presence in a public
collection of a work such as this could help enhance
a sense in society of a shared heritage and could
boost a commitment to serving diverse audiences.

46

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

While there was a remarkable array of more than
30 Rubens oil sketches in the United Kingdom,
very few were in the technique of oil on paper and
not many showed as direct and close-up a study
of a live model. Rubens certainly painted other
studies of heads that he subsequently used in
larger compositions, but they were almost always
on panel and rather smoother and finished in
execution than the work under consideration.
None of them depicted an African man. In its
immediacy and assured handling of paint,
The Head of an African Man Wearing a Turban must
have counted as one of Rubens’ most extraordinary
oil sketches and its addition to a UK public
collection would have significantly strengthened
the presence in this country of his oil sketches.
The applicant did not disagree that the painting
met the Waverley criteria.
We heard this case in February 2018 when the
painting was shown to us. We found that it met
the second and third Waverley criteria on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding
aesthetic importance and it was of outstanding
significance, firstly, for art historians as a
fascinating and unusual document of the working
practice of Rubens and as a testimony to his
interest in the depiction of African people; and,
secondly, for historians concerned with the
interrelations of cultures in the early-17th century.
We recommended that the decision on the export
licence application should be deferred for an
initial period of three months to allow an offer to
purchase to be made at the fair matching price of
£7,695,860. This represented the price at which
the owner had agreed to sell subject to the grant of
an export licence converted to Pounds Sterling at
USD/GBP FX rate (xe.com) on the date of the sale
agreement of 1.2994. We further recommended
that if, by the end of the initial deferral period, a
potential purchaser had shown a serious intention
to raise funds with a view to making an offer to
purchase the painting, the deferral period should
be extended by a further six months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the painting had been made and we were
not aware of any serious intention to raise funds.
An export licence was therefore issued.

Plate 12 The Head of an African Man Wearing a Turban
by Sir Peter Paul Rubens. Digital image courtesy of the
Getty’s Open Content Program.
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

47

Case 15 Mother and Child by
Barbara Hepworth
On 18 April 2018, we considered an application
to export a sculpture by Barbara Hepworth
(1903–75), Mother and Child. We concluded
that the sculpture satisfied both the second and

third Waverley criteria. The application for an
export licence was subsequently withdrawn so
consequently no decision on the application was
announced by the Secretary of State.

Case 18 (2015–16)
Scottish seal matrix pair
(formerly known as Medieval King Robert the Bruce of Scotland
and Dunfermline Abbey Cokete seal matrix pair)
A two-part cocket (or cokete) seal matrix of the
Abbey of Dunfermline, formed of an obverse
and a reverse matrix, within a presentation box.
Matrices made of copper alloy (identified as
brass); box made of wood. Each matrix is 55mm in
diameter, weight 337g. Unknown maker and date.
The applicant had applied to export the seal matrix
pair to the United States. The value shown on the
export licence application was £151,250, which
represented the hammer price paid by the owner
at auction plus buyer’s premium.
An application to export the seal matrix pair
was initially considered by the Committee on
18 November 2015. The Curator, Late Medieval
Europe Collections, The British Museum, acting as
expert adviser, had objected to the export of the
seal matrix pair under the first and third Waverley
criteria on that the grounds that its departure
from the UK would be a misfortune because it was
closely connected with our history and national
life and it was of outstanding significance for the
study of medieval history and seal matrices. The
Committee recommended that the seal matrix
pair met the first and third Waverley criteria on
the grounds that it was of great value for the study
of medieval goldsmiths’ work and sigillography
and the re-establishment of Scottish institutions
under Robert the Bruce. We recommended that the
decision on an export licence should be deferred
for an initial period of three months and that if,
by the end of the initial deferral period, a potential
purchaser had shown a serious intention to raise
funds with a view to making an offer to purchase
the seal matrix pair, the deferral period should
be extended by a further three months.
The Secretary of State placed a temporary

48

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

export bar on the seal at a recommended price
of £151,250 on 22 March 2016. The exportdeferral process was suspended to allow for new
information to be considered. Subsequently, the
Secretary of State requested that the Committee
provide further advice. The Committee met on
11 January 2017 to further consider the application
to export the seal matrix pair.
The expert adviser had revised their previous
objection to the export of the seal matrix pair but
continued to propose that the seal matrix met
the third Waverley criterion on the grounds that
its departure from the UK would be a misfortune
because it was of outstanding significance for study
of Scottish antiquarianism and sillography.
The expert adviser had provided a written
submission stating that the seal matrix pair ‘was
used by local officials for collecting customs duties
for the crown’ (Harvey and McGuiness, 1996, p.41).
The matrices had previously been associated with
the reign of Robert I King of Scotland (r. 1306–29),
known as Robert the Bruce. A cocket seal for the
Regality of Dunfermline was commissioned by
Robert I on 10 July 1322. However, there were no
known surviving impressions or casts taken from
this seal matrix and therefore no evidence for
what it looked like. As a result, the matrices under
consideration could not be confidently associated
with Robert I’s commission of a cocket seal.
The seal matrices were reportedly discovered in
1809 by JG Dalyell who wrote that he found two
cocket seal matrices at Dunfermline with a Rev
Fernie which he deposited with the Faculty of
Advocates, Edinburgh. From 1809 these matrices
were kept and displayed in the Faculty of Advocates

Library, founded in 1682. Located in Edinburgh,
the Faculty of Advocates and its Library were at
the heart of the growth in Scottish antiquarianism,
in which many of its members played a leading
role. The significance of the matrices arises from
their association with the antiquarian figures who
discovered, collected and studied these objects
in the 19th century, during which time they were
widely published and formed part of the fledgling
study of Scottish seal matrices and seals.
Scientific analysis of the seal matrices was
undertaken at The British Museum to investigate
their composition and manufacture. This revealed
some evidence of casting on the reverse matrix,
and that both had a similar metal content which
was consistent with a date earlier than the
late-19th century. The XRF analysis was carried
out on uncleaned surfaces, and in a constrained
time period, so should be regarded as semiquantitative only. When asked how the analysis
compared with that of other medieval seal
matrices, the expert confirmed that as extremely
few medieval seal matrices have been the subject
of scientific investigation, there is no body of
comparable analyses against which these results
can be assessed.
On the evidence available, inconclusive as it was,
the seal matrices may be considered to have had
considerable value on the grounds of antiquarian
interest. There was strong documentary and
physical evidence which demonstrated the great
importance these matrices had to the study of
Scottish history.
The applicant did not wish to give a further written
response or add to the report of the expert adviser.
We heard this case in January 2017 when
the seal matrix pair was shown to us. The
Committee agreed that it was not possible to
confirm or discount the possibility that the seal
under consideration was a medieval object,
commissioned by Robert the Bruce on 10 July
1322. The lack of a corpus of comparable objects,
impressions or casts which date from before the
seal matrix’s rediscovery in the 19th century and
the inconclusive nature of the scientific analysis
undertaken by The British Museum made confident
association with Robert the Bruce’s commission
for Dunfermline Abbey impossible. We found
that it met the third Waverley criterion on the
grounds that its departure from the UK would
be a misfortune because it was of outstanding

Plate 13 Scottish seal matrix pair

significance for the study of sigillography and
Scottish antiquarianism. We recommended that
the decision on the export licence application
should be deferred for an initial period of three
months to allow an offer to purchase to be made
at the fair matching price of £151,250. We further
recommended that if, by the end of the initial
deferral period, a potential purchaser had shown
a serious intention to raise funds with a view to
making an offer to purchase the seal matrix pair,
the deferral period should be extended by a further
three months.
At the end of the initial deferral period, no offer to
purchase the seal matrix pair had been made and
we were not aware of any serious intention to raise
funds. An export licence was therefore issued.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

49

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Appendices

50

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Appendix A
Report on additional funding
for acquisitions
UK public institutions, regrettably, have very
limited acquisition funds. We are extremely grateful,
as always, for the external funding provided towards
purchasing items placed under deferral as a result
of recommendations we have made. The money
provided by the main funding bodies for all acquisitions
of cultural objects is listed below, and the tables in
Appendix H give specific details of the funding
received for export-deferred items.

Year

National Heritage Heritage
Memorial Fund
Lottery Fund
(£ millions)
(museums
/galleries)
(£ millions)

Heritage
Lottery Fund
(manuscripts
/archives)
(£ millions)

Total
(£ millions)

Total adjusted
for inflation
as per 2018
(£ millions)
approximate*

2008–09

13.79

1.12

0.32

15.23

20.07

2009–10

4.01

0.36

0.04

4.41

5.55

2010–11

12.34

0.69

0.26

13.29

15.91

2011–12

4.99

6.04

0.11

11.14

12.92

2012–13

4.69

10.48

0.70

15.87

17.87

2013–14

6.54

16.31

0.019

22.87

25.15

2014–15

5.30

7.64

(1.62)

12.94

14.09

2015–16

4.62

5.42

(0.12)

10.04

10.75

2016–17

4.68

18.87

(0.34)

23.55

24.34

2017–18

5.51

0.91

0.35

6.77

6.77

* Figures based on the Bank of England Inflation Calculator for illustrative purposes only:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-policy/inflation/inflation-calculator
Please note from 2014–15 until 2016-17 the HLF funding museum/galleries is reported as
inclusive of funding for manuscripts/archives

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

51

National Heritage Memorial Fund and Heritage Lottery Fund1 spend (£ millions)
on acquisitions 2008–09 to 2017–18
25

£ millions

20

15

10

5

0

08–09

09–10

10–11

11–12

12–13

13–14

14–15

15–16

16–17

17–18

Years
National Heritage Memorial Fund

Heritage Lottery Fund (museums/galleries)

Heritage Lottery Fund (manuscripts/archives)

Total

Main funding bodies
i) National Heritage Memorial Fund
The National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF), set up
under the National Heritage Act 1980 in memory of people
who gave their lives for the UK, acts as a fund of last resort
to provide financial assistance towards the acquisition,
preservation and maintenance of land, buildings, works of
art and other objects which are of outstanding importance
to the national heritage and are at risk. The NHMF’s
grant-in-aid since 2010–11 has been £5 million per annum
and, where necessary, it can use its endowment fund for
exceptional cases.
NHMF has funded one export-stopped item this year: the
Fitzwilliam Museum acquired a remarkable marble bust of
Queen Victoria by Sir Alfred Gilbert. Having been displayed
in The Army & Navy Club, London, since its completion in
1889, the bust will continue to have a prominent public
presence in the galleries of the Fitzwilliam.
Outside export-stopped items, NHMF continued to
fund across a broad variety of heritage. It supported the
acquisition of three extraordinary treasure finds: the
Galloway Hoard, an internationally significant hoard of
Viking Age artefacts was acquired by National Museums
Scotland; a Bronze Age torc, remarkable for its size,
was acquired by Ely Museum, and a set of high-status
Anglo-Saxon grave goods went to Norfolk Museums.
1
52

Artworks secured for the nation included two by the British
artist Eric Ravilious. His watercolours Beachy Head and
Two Women in a Garden are now permanently held in the
collections of the Towner and Fry Art Galleries respectively.
Another art acquisition was an outstanding portrait of Dylan
Thomas. This popular portrait was on long-term loan to the
National Portrait Gallery, but has now become part of its
nationally important collections.
NHMF also funded an extraordinary archive, the Clark
collection of DH Lawrence. This eclectic collection of
the author’s correspondence, notebooks, artworks and
personal possessions had been on loan to the University of
Nottingham for over 20 years. It will now remain a part of
the University’s designated Lawrence collection. Details of
awards for the acquisition of export-deferred items are in
Appendix H (page 67).

ii) Heritage Lottery Fund
The Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF) is the largest funder of
the UK’s heritage. As in previous years, there has been
a spread of acquisitions across portable heritage from
archives and fine art/sculpture through to archaeology.
The Heritage Lottery Fund did not support any
export-stopped items this year.
The largest award made for an acquisition in 2017–18
was £350,000 to the National Library of Scotland to

The Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF) is now known as the The National Lottery Heritage Fund (NLHF).
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

acquire a collection of 14,000 photographs, dating from
photography’s earliest days. Remarkable in its breadth
and historic interest, the collection depicts Scots at work
and at play. The library, in partnership with National
Galleries of Scotland, will digitise the photographs, and
make them widely accessible.
Grayson Perry’s humorous comment on wealth and
taste, the ceramic Posh Art, was acquired by the Victoria
Gallery in Bath with the aid of a grant from HLF. It is to
become an integral part of their learning programme
and a contemporary link with their more classic
collection of ceramics.

vi) Acceptance in Lieu and the Cultural
Gifts Scheme
Both these schemes bring important works of art, heritage
objects, manuscripts and archives into public ownership.
In 2017–18, 44 cases were completed, resulting in almost
£40 million-worth of important cultural property being
secured for the nation. Details of the schemes and the
property acquired under them are in the Acceptance in
Lieu and Cultural Gifts Scheme 2017–18 Annual Report,
available on the Arts Council England website.

vii) Private treaty sales

iv) ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund

If a heritage object is sold on the open market, the vendor
may be liable to Capital Gains Tax and Inheritance Tax.
However, these tax charges are not incurred if an owner
sells the object by private treaty to a body (for example,
a museum or gallery) listed under Schedule 3 to the
Inheritance Tax Act 1984. Qualifying heritage objects
include any previously granted conditional exemption
or an item which would qualify as of pre-eminent
importance. This dispensation was extended in April
2009 to Corporation Tax on companies’ chargeable gains.
This is an advantageous arrangement because a public
collection will need to raise less purchase funds than
would have been paid under normal arrangements to the
extent of a proportion of the tax (usually 75 per cent) that
would otherwise have been chargeable. As an incentive
to vendors to offer qualifying heritage objects first to
British public collections, the remaining proportion of the
tax (usually 25 per cent) that would otherwise have been
chargeable may be retained by the vendor.

The Arts Council England/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
assists the collections of non-national museums, galleries,
specialist libraries and record offices in England and
Wales. The fund was not asked to support any exportdeferred items in the reporting year.

Schedule 3 to the Inheritance Tax Act 1984 lists those
museums which are able to benefit from a ‘douceur’
when acquiring works of art that are subject to either
Inheritance Tax, Capital Gains Tax or Corporation
Tax on sale.

Ditchling Museum has acquired an unparalleled collection of
books, pamphlets and posters produced by the St Dominic’s
Press in the 1920s and 1930s; the press was originally located
in Ditchling, Sussex. Thanks to a HLF grant, the collection has
been preserved and will be cared for and freely available for
public display, research and learning.

iii) Art Fund
Art Fund is the national fundraising charity for art, helping
to increase the range and quality of art in public collections
across the UK. In 2017–18, Art Fund offered support towards
the acquisition of three items placed under temporary
deferral. These were The Schmadribach Waterfall by Joseph
Anton Koch, and Mae West Lips Sofa and Lobster Telephone
(White Aphrodisiac), both Salvador Dalí and Edward James.
Details are in Appendix H.

v) National Fund for Acquisitions
The National Fund for Acquisitions (NFA), administered by
National Museums Scotland with Scottish Government
funding, contributes towards the acquisition of objects for
the collections of accredited museums and galleries and
specialist libraries and archives in Scotland.
In 2017–18, the NFA made 48 payments totalling
£129,085, enabling 29 organisations to make acquisitions
with a total purchase value of £367,740. At 31 March 2018,
a further 13 grants with a total value of £43,483 had been
committed but not yet paid.
The NFA was not asked to support any export-deferred
items in the reporting year and none have so far been
requested in the current financial year.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

53

Advisory Council on the Export
of Works of Art and Objects of
Cultural Interest
Many different branches of art and learning have an
interest in the export of cultural objects and all the issues
associated with it, as do many different UK institutions.
They cannot all be represented on the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects
of Cultural Interest, but their knowledge and advice is
valuable. The original Waverley Committee therefore
recommended the creation of a widely representative
Advisory Council, which would meet from time to time,
as circumstances might require, to discuss matters of
common interest and the operation of the system as a
whole. It was envisaged that the Council would advise
whether the right standards were being applied to
the different categories of objects, as well as enabling
institutions (not least regional ones) and the art trade
to make their views known.
Members of the Council include the expert advisers
who refer objects to the Reviewing Committee (and are
normally appointed by the Secretary of State for Digital,
Culture, Media & Sport as ‘champions’ for their retention
when the decision on the export licence is deferred),
as well as representatives of the institutions seeking to
acquire deferred items, of grant-making bodies, of the art
trade and of interested associations (see Appendix I for
full details).
The Advisory Council is normally convened annually
and met most recently on 14 June 2018. The main focus
of this year’s meeting was the responsibility of national
museums in the age of Brexit. The Council also considered
the draft policy section of the Reviewing Committee’s
Annual Report for 2017–18. Its comments have been fully
considered and are reflected in this text.

Manuscripts, documents and archives
The Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents and
Archives is a sub-committee of the Reviewing Committee.
Its terms of reference were revised in 2005 and are
as follows:
‘To consider the present arrangements for the export
control of manuscripts, documents and archives, and the
sources of funds available (to UK institutions) for their
acquisition and to make recommendations resulting
from this consideration.’
For membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts,
Documents and Archives, see Appendix K.
The Working Party usually meets annually, although
it may meet more frequently if necessary. It met most
recently on 21 May 2018 when it considered requests

54

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

for and the retention of copies by expert advisers; and
items that are found to meet the Waverley criteria but
for which there are no matching offers. The Committee
also expressed deep concern about the funding of local
government archives and the effect this had on their
ability to identify and acquire significant items, and
catalogue existing collections. This could have grave
consequences for the preservation of the national
and of local heritages.
The Working Party then looked at sources of financial
help for the acquisition of manuscripts, documents and
archives. Written reports had been submitted by the
ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund, the PRISM Fund, the
Friends of the National Libraries, the Secretary of the
Acceptance in Lieu Panel and The National Archives sales
catalogue monitoring service. The Heritage Lottery Fund
and National Heritage Memorial Fund provided details of
funding towards archival and manuscript material.

i) ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
During 2017–18, the Arts Council England/Victoria &
Albert Purchase Grant Fund considered 25 cases in respect
of manuscripts, documents and archival photographs, and
offered 20 grants totalling £74,359, enabling purchases
amounting to £523,440 to go ahead. Items purchased
ranged from Lantern slides of the construction of Beachy
Head Lighthouse 1900-02, bought by the East Sussex
Record Office in Brighton, to a manuscript treatise on the
Doctrine of the Two Covenants and Original Sin c. 1660,
which was acquired by Lambeth Palace Library.

ii) PRISM Fund
The PRISM Fund supported the acquisition and
conservation of material relating to all fields of the history
of science, technology, industry and medicine. The PRISM
fund was retired in 2018 and the 2017/18 grants represent
the last year of PRISM projects. During 2017–18, one grant
was made towards the acquisition and conservation of
archival or similar material, totalling £10,300.

iii) Friends of the National Libraries (FNL)
The FNL assists various institutions primarily by
promoting the acquisition of rare books, manuscripts,
fine bindings and records of historical, literary, artistic,
architectural and musical interest. In 2017 the Friends
made or committed 44 grants, totalling over £229,000;
over £130,000 of this was awarded to university libraries,
county record offices and smaller institutions.
The largest grants, of £20,000 each, were made to
Lincolnshire Archives for the Monson Papers, and to
Doncaster Archives for the manor court rolls of the
lordship of Conisbrough. Edinburgh University Library
was awarded £18,000 towards a copy of the first volume
of Ben Jonson’s Workes (2nd edn., 1640), with extensive

contemporary annotations, judged by the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of Art to be of
outstanding importance under the Waverley criteria.

iv) Heritage Lottery Fund and National
Heritage Memorial Fund
In 2017–18, the Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF) committed
£911,600 to the archives sector for the acquisition and
conservation of manuscripts and documents, while the
National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF) committed
£1,140,702 over the same period. The recipients of the
HLF and NHMF grants ranged from the British Library
for their acquisition of the Mostyn Psalter-Hours to
the National Galleries and National Library of Scotland
acquisition of 14,000 photographs from the Murray
MacKinnon Collection.

v) Acceptance in Lieu
The Acceptance in Lieu (AIL) and Cultural Gifts Scheme
(CGS) are also important means of retaining archival
material within the United Kingdom. During 2017–18,
there were nine offers accepted via the AIL mechanism
and one gift through the CGS which were either archives
or contained archival material. Items accepted ranged
from the personal and professional archive of Lord
(Richard) Attenborough and 22 autograph letters signed
by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (known as Mahatma
Gandhi) to the archive of British Brutalist architect
Sir Denys Lasdun and the archive of Poet Laureate
Robert Bridges.
Information on all works of art and the archives accepted
in lieu in 2017–18 can be found on Arts Council England’s
website at www.artscouncil.org.uk.

vi) The National Archives sales catalogue
monitoring service
The sales catalogue monitoring service, among its other
functions, notifies repositories when manuscripts and
archives become available for acquisition through public
sales. This service is greatly valued by repositories and the
Working Party commends the assistance it gives them.
In 2017–18, 90 items were purchased by 57 different
repositories as a result of notifications. However, there
were 23 unsuccessful bids as repositories were outbid or
dealers had already disposed of stock.
The Working Party strongly endorses the work of these
funds, schemes and services, and expresses its thanks to
the advisers and administrators of all of them, who work
hard, often at very short notice, to enable applicants to
acquire material. It noted that the national endorsement
they provide to local institutions is often as valuable as
the financial assistance given.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

55

Table 1
The statistics below show the figures for the number
of cases from 2008–09 to 2017–18.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Year

Cases
considered
by the
Committee

Cases where
a decision on
the licence
application
was deferred

Cases in (3)
where items
were not
licensed for
permanent
export

Cases where
items were
not licensed
for permanent
export as %
of (3)

Value (at
deferral) of
cases in (4)
where items
were not
licensed for
permanent
export (£m)

Cases in (3)
where items
were licensed
for permanent
export

Cases where
items were
licensed for
permanent
export as %
of (3)

Value of
items in (3)
(at deferral)
licensed for
export (£m)

2008–09

22

16

9

56

1.5

7

44

14.2

2009–10

141

132

7

54

10.1

6

46

60.8

2010–11

183

14 4

7

50

5.9

7

50

65.8

2011–12

11

7

4

57

29.8

3

43

44.8

2012–13

24

195

7

37

11.2

126

63

103.5

2013–14

29

22

8

36

13.9

14

64

66.9

2014–15

17

12

5

42

6.7

7

58

41.4

2015–16

25

21

14

67

79

7

33

37.6

2016–17

22

15

7

47

25.3

8

53

41.4

2017–18

15

12

7

58

3

5

42

58.5

Totals

197

151

75

50

186.4

76

50

534.9

1	Excludes one case which was carried over to 2010–11.
2

Excludes one case which was carried over to 2010–11.

3

Includes one case which was carried over from 2009–10.

4

Includes one case which was carried over from 2009–10.

5	Includes one case which was considered in 2011–12, but referred to the
Secretary of State in 2012–13.
6	Includes one case where the applicant was informed that a licence could
be issued, but decided to continue negotiations with a UK purchaser. To
date, an export licence has not been issued.
Please note these tables were updated in 2018 as three outstanding cases were
resolved by the time the 2016–17 annual report was published:
Licences issued for Statue of Sekhemka (2014–15) and Scottish seals (2015–16)
Licence refused for a painting by Pontormo (2015–16)

56

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Table 2
The statistics below show the figures for the values
associated with cases from 2008–09 to 2017–18.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Year

Cases where
a decision on
the licence
application was
deferred

Value of items in
(2) (£m)

Cases where
items were
acquired by
institutions or
individuals in
the UK (4)1

Value (at
deferral) of
items in (4) (£m)

Value of items
in (5) as % of (3)
(£m)

Cases where
the application
was refused
or withdrawn
after the
announcement
of the Secretary
of State’s
decision

Value of items in
(7) (£m)

2008–09

16

15.7

9

1.5

10

0

0

2009–10

132

71.5

6

10.1

14

1

0.6

2010–11

143

71.7

4

3.8

5

3

2.1

2011–12

7

74.6

4

29.8

40

0

0

2012–13

194

114.8

6

11.2

10

1

0.04

2013–14

22

80.7

8

13.9

17

1

12.55

2014–15

12

48.1

5

6.7

14

0

0

2015–16

21

116.6

9

7

6

5

72

2016–17

15

66.7

4

11.8

18

3

13.5

2017–18

12

61.6

7

3

5

0

0

Totals

151

722

62

98.8

14

14

100.7

1	This only includes items purchased by individuals who agreed to guarantee
satisfactory public access, conservation and security arrangements.
2

Excludes one case which was carried over into 2010–11.

3

Includes one case which was carried over from 2009–10.

4	Includes one case which was considered in 2011–12, but referred to the
Secretary of State in 2012–13.
5	Deferred at £12,500,000; licence application was withdrawn and the item
was subsequently purchased for £10,000,000.
Please note these tables were updated in 2018 to include an outstanding case
which had been resolved by the time the 2016–17 annual report was published: a
painting by Pontormo (2015–16).

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

57

Appendix B
History of export controls in the UK
The reasons for controlling the export of what are now
known as cultural goods were first recognised in the UK at
the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries.
Private collections in the UK had become the prey of
American and German collectors, and it was apparent that
many were being depleted and important works of art
sold abroad at prices in excess of anything that UK public
collections or private buyers could afford. It was against
this background that the National Art Collections Fund
was established in 1903 to help UK national and regional
public collections to acquire objects that they could not
afford by themselves.
Until 1939, the UK had no legal controls on the export
of works of art, books, manuscripts and other antiques.
The outbreak of the Second World War made it necessary
to impose controls on exports generally in order to
conserve national resources. As part of the war effort,
Parliament enacted the Import, Export and Customs
Powers (Defence) Act 1939, and in addition the Defence
(Finance) Regulations, which were intended not to restrict
exports but to ensure that, when goods were exported
outside the Sterling Area, they earned their proper quota
of foreign exchange. In 1940, antiques and works of art
were brought under this system of licensing.
It was in 1950 that the then Labour Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir Stafford Cripps, established a committee
under the Chairmanship of the First Viscount Waverley
‘to consider and advise on the policy to be adopted by His
Majesty’s Government in controlling the export of works
of art, books, manuscripts, armour and antiques and to
recommend what arrangements should be made for the
practical operation of policy’. The Committee reported
in 1952 to RA Butler, Chancellor in the subsequent
Conservative administration, and its conclusions still form
the basis of the arrangements in place today.

Current export controls
The export controls are derived from both UK and EU
legislation. The UK statutory powers are exercised by the
Secretary of State under the Export Control Act 2002.
Under the Act, the Secretary of State for Digital, Culture,
Media & Sport has made the Export of Objects of Cultural
Interest (Control) Order 2003. Export controls are also
imposed by Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 on
the export of cultural goods. The control is enforced by
Border Force, a law enforcement command within the
Home Office. If an item within the scope of the legislation
is exported without an appropriate licence, the exporter

58

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

and any other party concerned with the unlicensed export
of the object concerned may be subject to penalties,
including criminal prosecution, under the Customs and
Excise Management Act 1979.

The Reviewing Committee on the Export of
Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
An independent Reviewing Committee on the Export
of Works of Art was first appointed in 1952 following
the recommendations of the Waverley Committee.
It succeeded an earlier committee of the same name
established in 1949, comprising museum directors and
officials, which heard appeals against refusals and, from
1950, all cases where refusals were recommended.
The Committee’s terms of reference, as set out in the
Waverley Report, were:
i)

t o advise on the principles which should govern the
control of export of works of art and antiques under
the Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence)
Act 1939;

ii)

t o consider all the cases where refusal of an export
licence for a work of art or antique is suggested on
grounds of national importance;

iii) t o advise in cases where a Special Exchequer Grant is
needed towards the purchase of an object that would
otherwise be exported, and
iv) t o supervise the operation of the export control
system generally.
These were subsequently revised following the
recommendations of the Quinquennial Review, which also
recommended that the Committee’s name be expanded
by adding ‘and Objects of Cultural Interest’. (See Appendix
C for revised terms of reference.)
The Committee is a non-statutory independent body
whose role is to advise the Secretary of State whether
a cultural object which is the subject of an application
for an export licence is a ‘national treasure’. It will
designate an object as a national treasure if it considers
that its departure from the UK would be a misfortune on
one or more of the following three grounds, which are
collectively known as the Waverley criteria (so named
after Viscount Waverley) and which were spelt out in the
conclusions of the Waverley Report.
The Committee consists of eight full members, appointed
by the Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media &
Sport, seven of whom have particular expertise in one or

more relevant fields (paintings, furniture, manuscripts
etc), and a Chair. A list of members during 2017–18 is at
the front of this report and brief details of members are
included in Appendix D.

Since the Committee was set up in 1952, many important
works of art have been retained in the UK as a result of its
intervention. These embrace many different categories.
An illustrative selection includes:

The Waverley criteria

Paintings: Titian’s The Death of Actaeon (1971), Raphael’s
Madonna of the Pinks (2004), Manet’s Portrait of
Mademoiselle Claus (2012) and, from the British School,
Reynolds’ The Archers (2005).

The Committee will designate an object as a national
treasure if it considers that its departure from the UK
would be a misfortune on one or more of the following
three grounds:

History

Aesthetics

Scholarship

Is it closely
connected
with our history
and national life?

Is it of outstanding
aesthetic importance?

Is it of outstanding
significance for
the study of some
particular branch of
art, learning or history?

Waverley 1

Waverley 2

Waverley 3

They are not mutually exclusive and an object can,
depending on its character, meet one, two or three of
the criteria.
The Committee reaches a decision on the merits of
any object which the relevant expert adviser draws to
its attention.
A meeting is held at which both the expert adviser and the
applicant submit a case and can question the other party.
The permanent Committee members are joined for each
hearing by independent assessors (usually three), who
are acknowledged experts in the field of the object under
consideration. They temporarily become full members of
the Committee for the duration of the consideration of
the item in question.
If the Committee concludes that an item meets at least one
of the Waverley criteria, its recommendation is passed on
to the Secretary of State. The Committee also passes on an
assessment of the item’s qualities and a recommendation
as to the length of time for which the decision on the export
licence should be deferred, to provide UK institutions and
private individuals with a chance to raise the money to
purchase the item to enable it to remain in this country.
It is the Secretary of State who decides whether an export
licence should be granted or whether it should be deferred,
pending the possible receipt of a suitable matching offer
from within the UK which will lead to the refusal of the
licence if it is turned down.

Sculptures: The Three Graces by Canova (1993).
Antiquities: a ‘jadeite’ Neolithic axe-head brought into
Britain circa 4000 BC (2007).
Porcelain: a 102-piece Sèvres dinner service presented to
the Duke of Wellington (1979).
Furniture: a lady’s secretaire by Thomas Chippendale
(1998) and a pair of Italian console tables with
marquetry tops by Lucio de Lucci, the bases attributed
to Andrea Brustolon.
Silver: a Charles II two-handled silver porringer and cover,
circa 1660, attributed to the workshop of Christian van
Vianen (1999).
Textiles: a felt appliqué and patch-worked album coverlet
made by Ann West in 1820 (2006).
Manuscripts: the Foundation Charter of Westminster
Abbey (1980) and the Macclesfield Psalter (2005).
This short list shows quite clearly the immense cultural
and historic value of what has been achieved.
Unfortunately, and perhaps almost inevitably, some have
got away. Noteworthy examples include David Sacrificing
before the Ark by Rubens (1961), A Portrait of Juan de
Pareja by Velázquez (1971), Sunflowers by Van Gogh
(1986) and Portrait of an Elderly Man by Rembrandt (1999).
Among items other than pictures that have been exported
are The Burdett Psalter (1998), The World History of Rashid
al-Din (1980), The Codex Leicester by Leonardo da Vinci
(1980), the Jenkins or Barberini Venus (2003), Ordination
by Nicolas Poussin (2011), and Vue sur L’Estaque et la
Château d’If by Paul Cézanne (2015), all of which are of the
highest quality in their field. By any measure, these are all
losses to the UK of items of world significance.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

59

Appendix C

Honours System (report 2004) and the Funding of Political
Parties (report 2007).

Terms of reference of the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works of
Art and Objects of Cultural Interest

Peter Barber

The Committee was established in 1952 following
the recommendations of the Waverley Committee in
its report in September of that year. Its terms of
reference are:
a)	to advise on the principles which should govern the
control of export of objects of cultural interest under
the Export Control Act 2002 and on the operation of
the export control system generally;
b) 	to advise the Secretary of State on all cases where
refusal of an export licence for an object of cultural
interest is suggested on grounds of national
importance, and
c) 	to advise in cases where a special Exchequer grant is
needed towards the purchase of an object that would
otherwise be exported.

Appendix D
Membership of the Reviewing
Committee on the Export of Works
of Art and Objects of Cultural
Interest during 2017–18
Sir Hayden Phillips GCB DL (Chair)
Sir Hayden Phillips is the Independent Reviewer of the
Rulings of the Advertising Standards Authority. He is
also a Director of St Just Farms Ltd; and Chairman of the
Wellington Collection Management Committee and
of the IPSO Appointments Panel. He is a Lay Canon of
Salisbury Cathedral and Chairman of its Fabric Advisory
Committee. He was Chairman of the National Theatre
(2004–10) and of Marlborough College (2006–13); and
was a Deputy Lieutenant of Wiltshire (2008–18). Sir
Hayden’s previous career was in the Civil Service, latterly
heading two Departments as Permanent Secretary – the
Department for Culture, Media & Sport from 1992 to
1998, and the Lord Chancellor’s Department (now the
Ministry of Justice) from 1998 to 2004. He reviewed the
60

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Appointed 17 March 2014:
appointment expires 16 March 2022

Peter Barber, former Head of Cartographic and
Topographic Materials at the British Library, has many
exhibitions to his name, and was awarded an OBE for
services to Cartography and Topography in 2012. He
began his career at the British Library in the Department
of Manuscripts where he was involved in the cataloguing
of the Blenheim and Althorp archives and oversaw the
acquisition of a number of important manuscripts. He was
a consultant to several television series on the history of
maps and was editor and principal contributor to Tales
from the Map Room: Face and Diction about Maps and
their Makers (1993) and The Map Book (2005), and author
of The Queen Mary Atlas: Commentary (2005) and King
Henry’s Map of the British Isles: BL Cotton MS Augustus I.i.9:
Commentary (2009) as well as contributing an extended
chapter on mapmaking in England between 1470 and
1650 to volume 3 of the University of Chicago’s multivolume History of Cartography. He is a Vice President of
the Hakluyt Society and a Trustee of the Hereford Mappa
Mundi Trust. He is a Council Member of the Society of
Antiquaries’ Library and Collections Committee, and a
past Council Member of the Royal Numismatic and British
Art Medal Societies. He has recently been appointed a
Visiting Professor in the Department of History at King’s
College London and has been elected President of the
Hornsey Historical Society. He is also a board member of
The Lauderdale House Society Ltd and a Council Member
of the Friends of the Iveagh Bequest.
Appointed 1 August 2015:
appointment expires 31 July 2023

Richard Calvocoressi
Richard Calvocoressi, Director and Senior Curator of the
Gagosian Gallery, London, since 2015, former Director
of the Henry Moore Foundation and former Keeper, and
then Director, of the Scottish National Gallery of Modern
Art (1987–2007), was originally a curator at the Tate
Gallery (1979–87), where he was responsible for building
up the collections of pre- and post-War European art.
He also organised major exhibitions of Jean Tinguely
(1982) and Oskar Kokoschka (1986). In Scotland, he
acquired important international collections of Dada
and Surrealist art from the estates of Roland Penrose and
Gabrielle Keiller and was instrumental in attracting the
Anthony d’Offay gift to Edinburgh and London. Richard
Calvocoressi has published on various artists, including
Michael Andrews, Francis Bacon, Georg Baselitz, Reg
Butler, Lucian Freud, Anselm Kiefer, Paul Klee, Yves Klein,
René Magritte, Lee Miller and Henry Moore. He is an
Expert Member of the Comité Magritte.

In 2008, he was awarded a CBE for services to the arts,
particularly in Scotland.
Appointed 13 November 2012:
appointment expires 12 November 2020

Philippa Glanville
Philippa Glanville FSA is a Trustee of the Art Fund and a
member of the Westminster Abbey Fabric Commission.
Former Curatorial Adviser to the Harley Foundation,
Trustee of the Belmont House Trust, Bishopsland
Educational Trust and the Geffrye Museum, she is a Past
Master of the Company of Arts Scholars and a Liveryman
of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths. She was
awarded an OBE in 2015 for services to the history of
decorative arts and heritage. An historian and curator at
the London Museum, Museum of London and Victoria and
Albert Museum, she was Keeper of Metalwork at the V&A
from 1989–99. From 1999 to 2003, she was Academic
Director at Waddesdon Manor (the Rothschild Collection)
and Associate Curator at the Gilbert Collection,
Somerset House. She writes on silver, social history and
the history of collecting; her books include London in
Maps (Connoisseur/Ebury Press 1972), Silver in England
(Unwin Hyman 1972, Routledge 2010), Silver in Tudor &
Early Stuart England (V&A 1990), Women Silversmiths
1697–1845 (with J Goldsborough, Thames & Hudson 1991,
for the V&A), Silver, Elegant Eating and The Art of Drinking
(1996, 2002, 2007) and, for the Harley Foundation, Dinner
with a Duke (2010). Philippa has contributed to many
publications, including City Merchants & the Arts 1670–
1720 (Oblong/Corporation of London 2004), Feeding
Desire (Cooper Hewitt 2006) and Les Tables Royals en
Europe and Quand Versailles etait meublé en Argent (RMN
& Château de Versailles 1993 and 2001), Treasures of the
English Church (Goldsmiths Company/Holberton 2008)
and Baroque (V&A 2009).
Appointed 2 April 2010:
appointment expired 1 April 2018

Lowell Libson
Lowell Libson is an art dealer and Managing Director
and Proprietor of Lowell Libson & Jonny Yarker Ltd,
which specialises in British paintings, watercolours and
drawings of the 17th to 20th centuries. His specialist area
of expertise is the art market and British works of the
aforementioned period.
Appointed 3 June 2011:
appointment expires 2 June 2019

Christopher Rowell
Christopher Rowell was appointed to the curatorial staff
of the National Trust in 1977 and has been Furniture
Curator since 2002, advising on the Trust’s collections in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. He is Chairman of
the Furniture History Society and a Fellow of the Society

of Antiquaries. He has published widely, mainly on
country house collections, the display of art and furniture.
He was editor and principal contributor to Ham House:
400 Years of Collecting and Patronage (2013), which was
shortlisted for the William MB Berger Prize for British Art
History 2014, and has also contributed to Hardwick Hall:
A Great Old Castle of Romance (2016), the second book in
this series on the Trust’s most significant houses, which is
published by Yale University Press for the National Trust
and the Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art.
Appointed 10 April 2015:
appointment expires 9 April 2023

Leslie Webster
Former Keeper of the Department of Prehistory and Europe,
and senior curator of the early medieval collections at The
British Museum, Leslie Webster specialises particularly in
the Anglo-Saxon and Viking period, on which she publishes
and lectures widely. Her latest book is Anglo-Saxon Art:
A New History (2012). She is Honorary Visiting Professor
at the Institute of Archaeology, UCL. She co-curated four
major exhibitions on early medieval themes at The British
Museum, and also co-ordinated a series of exhibitions in five
major European museums, as part of the European Science
Foundation’s Transformation of the Roman World AD 400–
900 Project. She has served as a trustee and committee
member on many professional bodies, including the Society
of Antiquaries of London, the Royal Archaeological Institute
and the Society for Medieval Archaeology, where she
served as President from 2007–10. Other advisory work
has included membership of the former English Heritage
Museums and Archives Advisory Panel, the British Academy
Corpus of Anglo-Saxon Stone Sculpture Committee, and
the National Heritage Memorial Fund Advisory Panel. She
is actively engaged in the Staffordshire Hoard Research
Project, and is co-editor of the forthcoming publication on
this major Anglo-Saxon find.
Appointed 18 February 2013:
appointment expires 17 February 2021

Aidan Weston-Lewis
Aidan Weston-Lewis has worked at the National Galleries
of Scotland since 1992, where he is Chief Curator, with
responsibility for the Italian and Spanish collections.
Before that, he was Assistant Librarian at the Witt
Photographic Library at the Courtauld Institute of Art in
London. He has organised a series of major exhibitions and
has published widely in his area of specialism, particularly
on North Italian painting and drawing of the 16th and
17th centuries. In 2005, Aidan received from the Italian
Republic the honour of Cavaliere dell’Ordine della Stella
della Solidarietà Italiana in recognition of his contribution
to the study of Italian art.
Appointed 10 May 2011:
appointment expires 9 May 2019
Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

61

Appendix E
List of independent assessors who attended meetings during 2017–18
Dawn Ades, Professor of Art History (Retired), University of Essex

Case 5, 13

Brian Allen, Chairman, Hazlitt Group

Case 7

Charles Beddington, Director, Charles Beddington Ltd

Case 6

Robert Bowman, Bowman Sculpture

Case 3

Martin Butlin, Art Historian

Case 7

Zelda Cheatle, Photography Consultant and Curator
John Cherry, Independent Scholar

Case 10
Case 18 (2015–16)

Richard Dorment, Art Historian and Journalist

Case 3

Katherine Eustace, Independent Curator, Former Editor of Sculpture Journal

Case 3

Mark Evans, Head of Paintings and Photographs, Victoria and Albert Museum

Case 11

James Faber, Day & Faber

Case 1, 11

Pat Frost, Pat Frost Fashion & Textiles

Case 12

Francesca Galloway, Francesca Galloway Ltd

Case 12

Chris Green, Professor of the History of Art, The Courtauld Institute of Art

Case 5

Jonathan Harris, Independent Consultant

Case 9

Paul Harvey, Emeritus Professor of Medieval History, University of Durham
James Holland-Hibbert, Director, Hazlitt Holland-Hibbert

Case 18 (2015–16)
Case 15

Sarah Hornsby, Independent Consultant, Hornsby + Nugee Antiquities consultants

Case 2

Catherine Johns, Former curator of the Romano-British collections, The British Museum

Case 2

Alastair Laing, Independent Consultant, Former Adviser on Pictures and Sculpture, National Trust
Martin Levy, Director, H Blairman & Sons

Case 1, 6
Case 9

Jeremy Lewison, Jeremy Lewison Ltd

Case 15

David Lomas, Professor, Art History & Visual Studies, University of Manchester

Case 13

Richard Marks, Professor, History of Art, University of Cambridge
Elizabeth McGrath, Emeritus Professor and Honorary Fellow, The Warburg Institute
Lucy Munro, Reader in Shakespeare and Early Modern Literature, King’s College London

62

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Case 18 (2015–16)
Case 14
Case 4

Richard Nagy, Director, Richard Nagy Ltd

Case 5

John Pearce, Senior Lecturer in Archaeology, King’s College London

Case 2

Aileen Ribeiro, Independent Consultant

Case 12

James Roundell, Director, Impressionist and Modern Art, Simon C Dickinson Ltd
Desmond Shawe-Taylor, Surveyor of The Queen’s Pictures, Royal Collections Trust
Lindsay Stainton, Independent Consultant

Case 8, 13
Case 14
Case 1, 11

Lindsey Stewart, Consultant Specialist, Photograph Department, Bernard Quaritch

Case 10

Simon Swynfen Jervis, Former Director of Historic Buildings, National Trust

Case 9

Belinda Thomson, Honorary Professor (History of Art), University of Edinburgh

Case 8

Sir Brian Vickers, Academic and Literary Scholar

Case 4

Ian Warrell, Independent Curator and Writer

Case 7

Lucy Whitaker, Senior Curator of Paintings, Royal Collection

Case 6

Sarah Whitfield, Independent Art Historian

Case 8

Calvin Winner, Head of Collections, Sainsbury’s Centre for Visual Arts

Case 15

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

63

Appendix F
Value of items placed under deferral (2008–09 to 2017–18)
i) for which permanent licences were issued, and
ii) where items were purchased by UK institutions or individuals

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Year

Value of items
where a decision
on the licence
application was
deferred (£m)

Value (at deferral)
of cases in (2)
where items
were licensed for
permanent export
(£m)

Value of items in (3)
as % of (2)

Value of items in
(2) that were not
licensed for export
(£m)

Value (at deferral)
of cases in (2)
where items were
purchased by UK
institutions or
individuals1 (£m)

Value of items in (6)
as % of (2)

2008–09

15.7

14.2

90

1.5

1.5

10

2009–10

71.5

60.8

85

10.72

10.1

14

2010–11

71.7

65.8

92

5.93

3.8

5

2011–12

74.6

44.8

60

29.8

29.8

40

2012–13

114.8

103.5

90

11.2

11.2

10

2013–14

80.7

66.9

83

13.9

13.9

17

2014–15

48.1

41.4

86

6.7

6.7

14

2015–16

116.6

37.6

32

79

7

6

2016–17

66.7

41.4

62

25.3

11.8

18

2017–18

61.6

58.5

95

3

3

5

Totals

722

534.9

74

187

98.8

14

1	This only includes items purchased by individuals who agreed to guarantee satisfactory public access, conservation and
security arrangements.
2

Includes value of one case (£554,937.50) where the application was withdrawn during the deferral period.

3	Includes value of one case (£389,600) where a matching offer was refused and the Secretary of State therefore refused an
export licence, and the value of two cases (£1,645,868) where the application was withdrawn during the deferral period.
Please note these tables were updated in 2018 as three outstanding cases had been resolved by the time the 2016–17 annual
report was published:
Licences issued for Statue of Sekhemka (2014–15) and Scottish seals (2015–16)
Licence refused for a painting by Pontormo (2015–16)

64

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Appendix G
Items licensed for export after reference to expert advisers for advice
1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018
Category

Advising authority

No of
items

Total value (£)

Architectural models

Sir John Soane’s Museum, Deputy Director

0

£0

Arms and armour

Royal Armouries, Leeds, Director General

17

£2,972,400

Books, maps etc

British Library, Keeper of Printed Books,
Head of Map Collections

25

£2,635,040

Books, drawings
and manuscripts
(natural history)

Natural History Museum, Special Collections Manager
Library & Archives

9

£253,707

Ceramics (Pottery)
and Glass

Victoria and Albert Museum, Head of Ceramics
& Glass Department

53

£5,319,093

Clocks and watches

The British Museum, Keeper of Clocks and Watches

10

£3,154,235

Coins and medals

The British Museum, Keeper of Coins and Medals

61

£5,155,441

Drawings: architectural,
engineering and scientific

Victoria and Albert Museum, Keeper of Word
& Image Department

31

£635,561

Drawings, prints,
water-colours

The British Museum, Keeper of Prints and Drawings

136

£116,596,841

Egyptian antiquities

The British Museum, Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities

7

£4,629,625

Ethnography and Western
Asiatic Antiquities

The British Museum, Keeper of the Department of Africa,
Oceania and the Americas

8

£3,648,512

Furniture and woodwork

Victoria and Albert Museum, Keeper of Furniture and
Textiles & Fashion Department

70

£10,751,700

Greek and Roman antiquities

The British Museum, Keeper of Greek and Roman
Antiquities

68

£19,990,149

Indian furniture, textiles and
works of art

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Asian
Department, South & South East Asian Collection

18

£6,792,440

Japanese antiquities

The British Museum, Department of Asia

1

£55,000

Manuscripts, documents and
archives

British Library, Curator, Department of Manuscripts

1,454

£32,055,747

Maritime material, including
paintings

National Maritime Museum, Director of Collections

1

£75,000

Middle East antiquities

The British Museum, Keeper of Middle East Antiquities

17

£5,498,823

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

65

Middle East ceramics, glass,
textiles and works of art

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of
Middle East Section

4

£980,199

Musical instruments

University of Edinburgh, Curator of Musical Instruments
Collections

52

£16,473,329

Oriental antiquities
(except Japanese)

The British Museum, Department of Asia

88

£13,233,314

Oriental furniture, porcelain
and works of art

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Asian
Department, Chinese Collection

120

£38,165,228

Paintings, British,
foreign post-1900

Tate Gallery

245

£552,553,298

Paintings, foreign pre 1900

The National Gallery, Director

129

£443,762,999

Paintings, miniature
and pastels

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Painting
Section, Word & Image Department

2

£6,120,000

Portraits of British persons

National Portrait Gallery, Director

49

£52,951,761

Photographs

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator, Photographs 79

£7,645,121

Prehistory & Europe (inc.
Archaeological material,
Medieval and later antiquities
& Metal Detecting Finds)

The British Museum, Keeper of Prehistory & Europe
Department of Portable Antiquities & Treasure
(Metal Detecting Finds)

24,250

£22,198,969

Scientific and
mechanical material

Science Museum, Head of Collections

2

£3,604,317

Sculpture

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Sculpture,
Metalwork, Ceramic & Glass Department Tate Gallery
(20th Century Sculpture)

103

£112,558,570

Silver and weapons, Scottish

National Museum Scotland, Director

0

£0

Silver, metalwork
and jewellery

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Sculpture,
Metalwork, Ceramic & Glass Department

109

£24,699,070

Tapestries, carpets
(and textiles)

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Furniture,
Textiles & Fashion Department

37

£6,839,148

Television, cinema and
photography technology

National Media Museum, Head

0

£0

Toys

Bethnal Green Museum of Childhood, Head

1

£200,000

Transport

British Motor Industry Heritage Trust

38

£41,117,050

Wallpaper

Victoria and Albert Museum, Senior Curator of Prints
Section, Word & Image Department

0

£0

War orders, medals and
decorations

Imperial War Museum

5

£1,475,000

Zoology (stuffed specimens)

Natural History Museum, Director of Science

1

£130,944

27,300

£1,564,927,630

Total
66

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Appendix H
Applications considered and deferred on the recommendation of the
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of
Cultural Interest, 2008–09 to 2017–18

Year

Number of
Waverley
items
granted a
permanent
export
licence

Value of
Waverley
items granted
a permanent
export licence
(£)

Number of
Waverley
items
purchased
during
deferral

Total value of
Waverley items
purchased
during deferral
(£)

Number of Support by HLF/
Waverley NHMF (£)
items
supported
by HLF/
NHMF

Number of Support by Art
Waverley Fund (£)
items
supported
by Art
Fund

Number of Support by V&A
Waverley Purchase Grant
items
Fund (£)
supported
by V&A
Purchase
Grant
Fund

2008–09

7

14,186,010

9

1,521,684

2

378,000

4

329,292

3

118,500

2009–10

6

60,813,750

6

10,119,674

2

186,000

3

245,100

1

17,000

2010–11

7

65,837,016

4

3,752,918

3

2,410,000

4

470,000

1

20,000

2011–12

3

44,830,190

4

9,252,560

2

6,025,000

2

1,100,000

0

0

2012–13

121

103,543,500

6

11,165,750

2

3,952,900

3

508,250

2

32,000

2013–14

14

66,862,143

8

13,852,095

1

6,300,000

4

820,000

1

10,000

2014–15

7

41,421,200

5

6,694,400

3

508,000

3

175,662

0

0

2015–16

7

37,611,550

9

7,000,513

6

3,505,215

5

910,000

0

0

2016–17

8

41,363,000

4

11,836,500

2

432,500

2

640,000

1

60,000

2017–18

5

58,541,462

7

3,016,978.79

1

267,607

3

266,000

0

0

1	Includes one case where the applicant was informed that a licence could be issued, but decided to continue negotiations with
a UK purchaser. To date, an export licence has not been issued.
Please note these tables were updated in 2018 to include two outstanding cases which had been resolved by the time the 2016–17
annual report was published: Statue of Sekhemka (2014–15) and Scottish seals (2015–16).

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

67

2017–18 (detail) – Acquisitions

Item

Purchaser

Price (£)

Support by
HLF/NHMF
(£)

The Schmadribach Waterfall The British Museum
near Lauterbrunnen,
Switzerland by Joseph
Anton Koch

£71,500
(inclusive of VAT)

Roman figurine of a man
wearing a hooded cloak

Chelmsford Museum

£550

A portrait bust, Queen
Victoria, by Alfred Gilbert

Fitzwilliam Museum

£267,607
£1,440,000
(inclusive of VAT)1

Workes (1640) by Benjamin The University of
Jonson
Edinburgh
Victoria and Albert
Museum

£496,881.56
(inclusive of VAT)

George I Palladian
baby house

V&A Museum of
Childhood

£78,000 (inclusive
of VAT)

Lobster Telephone (White
National Galleries of
Aphrodisiac), Salvador Dalí Scotland
and Edward James

£882,047.23
(inclusive of VAT)

Total

£3,016,978.79

Deferral price, however, tax remission available total price £1,317,607 (inclusive of VAT)

68

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Support by
V&A Purchase
Grant Fund

£30,000

£48,000

Mae West Lips Sofa,
Salvador Dalí and
Edward James

1

Support by
Art Fund
(£)

£136,000

£100,000

£267,607

£266,000

£0

Appendix I
Council of Northern Ireland; Arts Council of
Wales; Association of Independent Museums;
Conference of Directors of the National Museums
and Galleries; Friends of the National Libraries;
Heritage Lottery Fund; The National Archives;
National Archives of Scotland; National Fund for
Acquisitions; National Heritage Memorial Fund;
National Trust; National Trust for Scotland; Pilgrim
Trust; the PRISM Grant Fund for the Preservation of
Scientific and Industrial Material;

Composition of the Advisory Council
on the Export of Works of Art and
Objects of Cultural Interest
i)

t he independent members of the Reviewing
Committee ex officio;

ii)

t he Departmental assessors on the Reviewing
Committee, that is representatives of the
Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport
(DCMS), Department for International Trade,
HM Treasury, Foreign & Commonwealth Office,
HM Revenue & Customs, Scottish Executive
Department for Culture, National Assembly for
Wales Department for Culture and Northern
Ireland Department for Culture;

iii)

t he Directors of the English and Scottish national
collections and National Museum Wales, and
the Librarians of the National Libraries of Wales
and Scotland;

iv)

t he expert advisers to DCMS, to whom applications
for export licences are referred, other than those
who are members by virtue of iii) above;

v)

e ight representatives of non-grant-aided
museums and galleries in England, Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland, nominated by
the Museums Association;

vi)

r epresentatives of: ACE/V&A Purchase Grant
Fund; Art Fund; Arts Council England; Arts

vii)

r epresentatives of: British Academy; British Records
Association; Canadian Cultural Property Export
Review Board (observer status); Chartered Institute
of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP);
Council for British Archaeology; Historic Houses
Association; Historical Manuscripts Commission;
Royal Academy of Arts; Royal Historical Society;
Royal Scottish Academy; Scottish Records
Association; Society of Antiquaries of London;
Society of Archivists; Society of College, National
and University Libraries;

viii)

r epresentatives of the trade nominated by the:
Antiquarian Booksellers Association (two);
Antiquities Dealers Association (two); Association
of Art and Antique Dealers (two); Bonhams; British
Antique Dealers Association (three); British Art
Market Federation; British Numismatic Trade
Association (two); Christie’s; Fine Art Trade Guild;
Society of Fine Art Auctioneers and Valuers;
Society of London Art Dealers (two); Sotheby’s.

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

69

Appendix J
Further reading
The Export of Works of Art etc: Report of a Committee appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer (HMSO, 1952)
Export Licensing for Cultural Goods: Procedures and Guidance for Exporters of Works of Art and other Cultural Goods
(Arts Council England, 2018)
Export Control Act 2002 (HMSO)
The Export of Objects of Cultural Interest (Control) Order 2003 (SI 2003 No. 2759)
Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of cultural goods
Export Controls on Objects of Cultural Interest: Statutory guidance on the criteria to be taken into consideration
when making a decision about whether or not to grant an export licence (DCMS, March 2015)
Quinquennial Review of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art (DCMS, December 2003)
Response to the Quinquennial Review of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art
(DCMS, December 2004)
Goodison Review – Securing the Best for our Museums: Private Giving and Government Support
(HM Treasury, January 2004)
Dealing in Cultural Objects (Offences) Act 2003 (HMSO)
Combating Illicit Trade: Due diligence guidelines for museums, libraries and archives on collecting and borrowing
cultural material (DCMS, October 2005)
Contracting Out (Functions in Relation to Cultural Objects) Order 2005 – Statutory Instrument 2005 No. 1103
Saved! 100 Years of the National Art Collections Fund (Richard Verdi, Scala Publishers Ltd, 1999)

70

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

Appendix K
Membership of the Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents
and Archives during 2017–18
Peter Barber, Chairman
Julia Brettell, ACE/V&A Purchase Grant Fund
Paula Brikci, PRISM Grant Fund Manager, Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
Mark Caldon, Cultural Property Unit, Department for Culture, Media & Sport
Peter Durrant, Former County Archivist, Berkshire Record Office
Chris Fletcher, Keeper of Special Collections, Bodleian Libraries, Fellow, Exeter College
Scott Furlong, Director, Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
Matthew Haley, Bonhams
Brian Lake, Antiquarian Booksellers Association
Scot McKendrick, British Library
Margaret O’Sullivan, Former County Archivist, Derbyshire Record Office
Fiona Talbott, Head of Museums, Libraries and Archives, Heritage Lottery Fund
Anastasia Tennant, Senior Policy Adviser, Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
James Travers, The National Archives
Sarah Waldren, PRISM Fund Assistant, Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
Stephen Wemyss, Secretary, Working Party on Manuscripts, Documents and Archives/Cultural Property Officer,
Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
Frances Wilson, Export Licensing Manager, Collections and Cultural Property Unit, Arts Council England
John Wilson, John Wilson Manuscripts Limited/Antiquarian Booksellers Association
Joan Winterkorn, Archive and Manuscript Consultant, Former Director and Head of Valuations at Bernard Quaritch

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

71

Appendix L
Full list of plates
Plate 1a

The Schmadribachfall by Joseph Anton Koch © Bavarian State Painting Collections

18

Plate 1b
		

The Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen, Switzerland by Joseph Anton Koch
(in situ at The British Museum)

18

Plate 1c

The Schmadribach Waterfall near Lauterbrunnen, Switzerland by Joseph Anton Koch (front view)

19

Plate 2a

A Roman figurine of a man wearing a cloak (front view)

20

Plate 2b

A Roman figurine of a man wearing a cloak (rear view)

21

Plate 3a

A Portrait Bust, Queen Victoria, by Alfred Gilbert

22

Plate 3b

A Portrait Bust, Queen Victoria, by Alfred Gilbert (side view)

23

Plate 4a

Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson (spine and inner page spread)

24

Plate 4b

Workes (1640) by Benjamin Jonson (detail)

25

Plate 5a

Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí and Edward James (side view)

25

Plate 5b

Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí and Edward James (in situ).
Elizabeth Whiting & Associates / Alamy Stock Photo

27

Mae West Lips Sofa, Salvador Dalí and Edward James (front view)

28

Plate 5c

Plate 6	
The Rialto Bridge with the Palazzo dei Camerlenghi by Francesco Guardi

30

Plate 7	
Ehrenbreitstein by Joseph Mallord William Turner

32

Plate 8a

George I Palladian baby house (front view)

35

Plate 8b

George I Palladian baby house (front view with doors open)

36

Plate 9a

Images from the Life (The Norman Album) by Julia Margaret Cameron (cover view)

37

Plates 9b-j

Images from the Life (The Norman Album) by Julia Margaret Cameron (inner page details)

39

Plate 10
		

The Destruction of Pharaoh’s Host by John Martin.
Digital image courtesy of the Getty’s Open Content Program.

41

Plate 11a

Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac), Salvador Dalí and Edward James

43

Plate 11b

Lobster Telephone (White Aphrodisiac), Salvador Dalí and Edward James (detail)

44

Plate 12
The Head of an African Man Wearing a Turban by Sir Peter Paul Rubens
		Digital image courtesy of the Getty’s Open Content Program
Plate 13

72

Scottish seal matrix pair

Export of Objects of Cultural Interest 2017–18

46
49

